---
layout: post
title: "Marketing Execution Strategies"
date: "2015-06-27 18:40:19"
comments: false
categories: "Business"
---

## Why Offline is Still Important

Even though the Internet "liberates" some of us, that are still "disutility costs" associated with buying online as more than 90% of what is sold to consumers is still sold offline.

Friction points:

- Delivery times
- Uncertainty about "fit and feel"
- Cost of returns (time and money)


### Online/Offline Competition

Example: a local physical book stores opens up in your suburb. What impact would this have on amazon (virtual store) for example.

Canandian studies have highlighted, that competition is intense for popular products, but almost non-existent for niche products.

The **Long Tail** is about how products/services sold online change (or the mix), when customers are offered more variety. 


## Friction

The two key principles about how the virtual and physical worlds interact with each other.

### Search friction

In 1987. Where do I buy a TV. If I want better value, do I incure time/cost penalties to locate a better deal. How long do you spend searching.


### Geographic friction

If I lived in Manhatten, New York city. I have lots of consumer related products/services at my doorstep, as opposed to living a quieter life somewhere like Iowa City.

The location you live in imposes certain costs and delivers particular benefits.


## The Long Tail

The relationship of popularity to product.

Example: Books on amazon, say 5 million. A vast number of books, way more than a physical store could ever stock. The products that are so unpopular/niche it just wouldn't make sense to stock them in a physical store. Online makes it possible to target this so called "tail".

Historically, we lived in a world of "hits" (block busters), but now live in a world of infinite slots.

The economics of distribution have been radically altered for content, and product too.

The **Long Tail** exists because the economics of storage and distribution have changed. This is the **supply side**. Example: variety of beer, diapers, books...

The Long Tail is itself endogenous (**demand side**) as there are more ways for us to discover variety. Consumers tastes are becoming more varied, as we have access to more variety of product than ever before.


### Old-New Ecomonics

In 1897 Vilfredo Pareto found that 20% of the population owned 80% of the wealth (in the UK) giving rise to the *Law of the Vital Few* (80/20). The Long Tail changes this, as very long tails are now feasible/possible, stretching out the 20% to much larger proportions.

1949 George Zipf found that second most common word used 1/2 as much as the first; third 1/3 as much, etc.


The *tyranny of locality* (relate this idea to the concept of preference minorities). An audience that is spread too thin geographically used to not get served, e.g. Lagaan: once upon a time in India opened only two screens.

That is consumer choice is dictated by what the local sellers are willing to offer.


### Long Tail thoughts

**What is range of quality / satisfaction?**

How satisfied would be be for a **randomly selected product** that you drew from either the head or the tail. Movie based example. If you randomly selected a movie from the head (i.e. a blockbuster) there's a high probability that you are going to enjoy it. If however, you selected a niche/unusual/obscure movie from the tail of the movie market, odds are you won't enjoy it. This is just an average ranking. However, you may really/deeply enjoy something from the tail it if appeals to your preferences.

Characteristcs

- The ratio of niche products to "hits" is changing.
- Distribution efficiency is amplifying (digital, search, etc).
- Recommendations and reviews drive search so that consumers get into tail.

In essence the collective value of niches, can be as powerful as "hits".

> A Long Tail is just culture filtered unfiltered by scarcity.


**What does this imply for filtering?**




### MIT Long Tail Research Findings

Disentangling the supply side (larger product availability) from the demand side (easier for consumers to find and sample new products).

MIT study obtained data from a retailer offering identical product selection and prices through two different channels: Internet and catalog. They study focused on the mix of sales generated by the two channels.

Evidence is that Internet sales are significantly less concentrated (even after controlling for differences in customers and supply side factors such as taxes and shipping).

**The GINI coefficient**

`G = A / (A + B) [.49 v .53]`

Lorenz curve, highlights the proportion of a populations income to the total amount of available  cash (or products, etc). Example: in some communities a small proportion of the population retains most of the wealth (i.e. wealth is not distributed very evenly).

MIT findings. The Internet channel has more evenly distributed sales (and the difference cannot be attributed to differences in price or availability).

- Unit sales of "niche" products: 14.8% to 12.7%
- $ sales of "niche" products: 15% to 12.7%

Why. Because of the demand side. Search friction. Customers where able to locate niche items more easily:

- Directed search
- Non-directed search
- Recommender system



### Critiques of Long Tail

**Law of natural monopoly** (hits get disproportionate share of light users). Movie based example. People that rarely watch movies, are more likely to gravitate toward the big "hit" movies.

**Law of double jeopardy** (unfamiliar things are less well liked). 


## Preference Isolation

There is a correlation between preference isolation and Internet based sales. For example: vegemite in the US. As a preference isolated consumer, will likely turn to the Internet.

Research findings:

- Unit volumes of different brands in zip code *z* in MSA *m*, regressed on demographics and Preference Minority index.
- Compare the 90th percentile vs 10th percentile of Preference Minority Index. Category sales 50% higher. Niche brand sales 125% higher.


## How Internet Retailing Startups Grow

Five companies. netgrocer.com, diapers.com, warbyparker.com, bonobos.com, citruslane.com

Why is it that one zip code has very low sales of diapers.com, and another many customers.


### What matters most in Internet retailing

- Principle 1. Customer acceptance of online retail depends on offline shopping costs.
- Principle 2. Sales evolution is structured and predictable. How did netgrocer.com go from 30 zip codes in 1997 to 30,000 zip codes today? Word of mouth. Customers **observe** the behaviours of other customers (e.g. social observation if a soap package from soap.com is packaging in a nicely bright box that your peers will take note of).
- Principle 3. Migrating from "good" to "great" requires expansion to niche locations. Geographic distance. Social distance (i.e. the similarity of social traits between different populations of people). Social distance has been shown to migrate and demonstrate similar consumer patterns.


## Customers and Digital Marketing

Customer goals: attract, engage, retain subject to:

1. Never pay more to acquire than you will recoup, i.e. CLV > AC (Actual Cost)
2. CLV needs to incoporate "RLV"

Customer Lifetime Value (CLV) - the value of the customer.
Referal Lifetime Value (RLV) - the referral power of the customer.

Key tactic: encourage customers to refer and acquire other customers (diapers.com).


### Digital considerations

- Monologue to conversation. Virgin america tweet about being happy to be on flight VA125. Virgin followed up, promising to match america airlines status credits.
- Amplification through virtual and real world synergy.
- Long Tail leverage.
- Selection and treatment. Assume I'm a diapers.com customer, and diapers.com offers me an incentive for referring. Customers that are **selected** this way (word of mouth, referral) have been proven to have a higher CLV (lifetime value) because of this selection effect. **The treatment effect** is about the compounding effects of being a referred customer. You are more likely to in turn refer other customers.


### Marketing spend as an asset



## Influence and how information spreads

Network definition:

> Pathways through which information, advice, resources and support flow between people.

Networks usually exhibit homophily (birds of a feather flock together), either in characteristics of participants, or in preferences.

- Nodes (people)
- Connections (between people)
- Ability to share information and resources
- Constraints (geography, socioeconomics)

### Entering a network

- Participation in a network is a choice
- We decide how many people we want to connect to and how central we want to be
- When relationships are transitive (friends know each other) then we are deeply embedded

Influence typically does not spread beyond about 3 layers in the network (e.g. a friends, brothers girlfriend).


## Pricing Strategies

### Motivation

The *pricing lever* has driven a three-fold increase in the number of pricing directors reporting to C-level officers in the last 10 years.

By improving each/any of the following by 1%:

- Fixed cost - 2.3%
- Volume - 3.3%
- Variable costs - 7.8%
- Price - 11.1%

Examples:

**Trader Joe's** - offers unique dumplings, which noone else offers. Its unique. Hard to compare. I am getting ripped off? Trader Joe offets this problem through **signaling**. Offering other common place products (such as bottled water) at very low prices, signalling to the consumer "good value".

**Walmart** - why do they sell Tide detergent for $4.73, and many other products. They are signalling they have squeezed every cent out of the deal, again sending the message of "good value".






### Inputs to the pricing decision.

Four inputs to pricing:

- Floor
- Ceiling - customer willingness to pay.
- Competition - drop the possible ceiling.
- Amount 

5Cs and Pricing

- **Customers** - **price sensativity**, how elastic is it, i.e. if price is raised by 1% how much does demand drop. **Psychological issues** (odd numbered endings $3.99, $1,995), mental accounting, prospect theory including reference effects, loss aversion and diminishing sensativity. **Endowment Effect**.
- **Company** - financial considerations (internal rate of return / IRR). Consistency in the product lines (toyota camry price is influenced by toyota corolla). Consistency in image (e.g. walmart selling expensive products).
- **Collaborators** - margins and return on assets (ROA). How hard will the collaborator work to push your product; what kind of pull support do they expect? 
- **Competitors** - aggressiveness. Willingness to respond on price. Competitor position (market leader or follower.
- Context


ROA = Profit / Assets = Margin x Rotation


- The floor and ceiling bound the economic value to the customer (ECV) metric.
- The **5Cs** affect the final location of the actual price between the floor and ceiling.


### Getting deeper into Customer Factors

Price sensativity (drivers and measurement)

- Ease of comparison. Placing private label next to branded products increases the ease of comparison, adn thereby increases price sensativity.
- Expenditure. Large volume users tend to be more price sensitive. Consumers tend to be more price sensative when the focal component is a large part of total costs. Example, spending an extra $100 on tyres, if already paying $20,000 for car. No problem.
- Shared expenses - seperation between the user (e.g. Uber car service breaks the feeling of payment, or upgrading to a first-class ticket if my company is paying)
- Quality (e.g. complex legal case and paying for a top quality lawerer)


### Methods for price determination

1. Run an experiement.
2. **Statistical regression analysis** - compute the price elastisity based on sales data. Data mining.
3. Surveys
4. Conjoined analysis - similar to A/B testing. Priced glasses at $75, $85, $95 and $105.


## The 7M Framework

- Market (target audience) - who should I talk to (target segment)? e.g. people who dont drink milk.
- Message content - what should I tell them? e.g. make sure you have enough milk.
- Mission - what do we intend to acheive? e.g. increase milk consumption by one glass per week within a year.
- Message design - how shold I say it? e.g. milk deprivation campaign.
- Media strategy - how do I reach them? e.g. TV and print.
- Money - how much do I need to spend?
- Measurement - was it worth it? 60% aided recall of ads within 3 months. 2.67% (30M) increase in annual sales.

