---
layout: post
title: "Raspberry Pi Notes"
date: "2016-02-27 16:47:10"
comments: false
categories: "Geek"
---

The Raspberry PI II Model B is fricken amazing. An open, hackable Linux machine that fits in my pocket. The NOOBS setup does a fantastic job getting most things going. Here's some rough setup notes to get up and going.



### Wireless / wifi

Skip this if using the Ethernet interface. I wanted wifi via USB.

    sudo vi /etc/network/interfaces

This works for my network, which uses a hidden (non-broadcast) SSID:

    

Bounce the wireless interface to test it out:

    sudo ifdown wlan0
    sudo ifup wlan0

Works on my machine.


### Keyboard mapping

By default is configured to support a GB (Great Britain) keyboard layout, which is annoying if you are running on a US keyboard.

    $ sudo vi /etc/default/keyboard

Update `XKBLAYOUT` to this:

    XKBLAYOUT="us"


### Package upgrade

sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade


### Remote access packages

sudo apt-get install ssh
sudo apt-get install tightvncserver
sudo apt-get install avahi-daemon

> Avahi is a system which facilitates service discovery on a local network via the mDNS/DNS-SD (multicast DNS service discovery) protocol suite. It provides an object based interface to announce and browse services on the local network.

So very cool. Basically this removes the need to configure a static IP address to find the PI on your network. By default, will be discoverable as `raspberrypi.local`. Update the hostname (`/etc/hosts`) to your liking. To make this work, I had to make sure my other Linux machines on the network used the same `.local` suffix.


### TightVNC server

I don't really need this, but the PI II Model B is more than capable of driving an X Windows system.

The [documentation](https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/remote-access/vnc/README.md) is great to get things going.

Other bits:

- With a default NOOBS setup, there will now be two X sessions running, which would normally be a waste of resources. Stop the displaymanager running on `:0` by `service lightdm stop`.
- Connect with any VNC client. I use Vinagre on GNOME. Make sure you specify the port as `590X` where X corresponds to the remote desktop instance id (e.g. `:1`). Also I had trouble using mDNS discovery via `raspberrypi.local` and instead had to go with IP. `192.168.1.113::5901` worked for me (yes double `::`).
