---
layout: post
title: "Linux Virtual Machines"
date: "2017-04-08 16:59:01"
comments: false
categories: "linux"
---

In practice a sysadmin might replace 20 physical machines on an older network, with 2 physical machines, and 20 virtual machines (VMs). The 20 VMs would be installed on a shared storage volume, formatted with a clustered file system such as [GFS2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GFS2), for mounting by the 2 physical machines.

# Installing KVM

| Package | Description |
| --- | --- |
| qemu-kvm | Main KVM package |
| libvirt | The `libvirtd` service to manage hypervisors |
| libvirt-client | The virsh command and clients API to manage VMs |
| virt-install | CLIs for creating VMs |
| virt-manager | GUI VM admin tool |
| virt-top | CLI for VM stats |
| virt-viewer | GUI console to connect to VMs |

As an alternative to installing the packages individually, can just install the *Virtualization Host* and *Virtualization Client* package groups.

    yum group install "Virtualization Host" "Virtualization Client"

Verify the appropriate kernel modules have been loaded.

    # lsmod | grep kvm
    kvm_intel             200704  0
    kvm                   593920  1 kvm_intel

## Virtual Storage

VM storage images are generally huge files. It wise to dedicate a partition or logical volume to the `/var/lib/libvirt/images` directory. Another option is to symlink this somehwere that has ample capacity (note the SELinux contexts must be setup).

    $ mkdir ~/kvm
    $ su - root
    # semanage fcontext -a -t virt_image_t '/home/ben/kvm(/.*)?'
    # restorecon /home/ben/kvm
    # rmdir /var/lib/libvirt/images
    # ln -s /home/ben/kvm /var/lib/libvirt/images

## Virtual Network Interfaces

Virtual NICs can connect to Virtual Networks (not to be confused with each other). Each virtual network is associated to a virtual switch, such as `virbr0`. Cool! These virtual switches operate in NAT mode (default) when traffic is forwarded on to the physical host. Four types of Virtual NICs:

- Bridge: bridges physical and virtual interface.
- Bond: Combines multiple interfaces into a single logical for redundancy.
- Ethernet: New inteface.
- VLAN: An interface with IEEE 802.1Q VLAN tagging.


Kickstart is the Red Hat system for automated installations, that works from an answers file.
