---
layout: post
title: "Vim"
slug: "vim"
date: "2007-04-16 21:50:01"
lastmod: "2021-06-25 20:28:15"
comments: false
categories:
  - dev
tags:
  - vim
---

_Updated: 2021-01-22 20:28:26_

I finally (2007) bit the bullet and commited to learning a real text editor. Having dabbled with `vi` since the late 90s, decided on Vim. Once you break through its initial, steep, learning curve, its truly life changing. Level up, and become a text surgeon today.

I usually clone my `dotfiles` git repo straight into my home directory i.e. `~/dots`. A couple of symlinks later, I'm away:

    ln -nfs ~/dots/vim/vimrc ~/.vimrc
    ln -nfs ~/dots/vim ~/.vim

Vim is incredibly customisable. Its important to take the time to craft your own [`vimrc`](https://github.com/bm4cs/dots/blob/master/stow-home/neovim/.config/nvim/init.vim). Type `:options` to understand the various levers you can pull to make Vim your editor. 10+ years later, I still fine tune the editor to my needs and workflows.

<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

- [Help](#help)
- [Operators](#operators)
- [Object Selection](#object-selection)
- [Windows](#windows)
- [The Edit (e) Command](#the-edit-e-command)
- [Cool Things](#cool-things)
  - [relativenumber](#relativenumber)
  - [Calculator](#calculator)
  - [Spell checking](#spell-checking)
  - [Sudo Save](#sudo-save)
- [Plugins](#plugins)
  - [nnn.vim](#nnnvim)
  - [denite](#denite)
  - [surround](#surround)
  - [vim-markdown-toc](#vim-markdown-toc)
  - [vim-easy-align](#vim-easy-align)
  - [vim-commentary](#vim-commentary)
  - [vim-easy-motion](#vim-easy-motion)
  - [vim-better-whitespace](#vim-better-whitespace)
  - [vim-prettier](#vim-prettier)
  - [vim-css-color](#vim-css-color)
  - [coc.nvim](#cocnvim)
- [Setup behind a proxy](#setup-behind-a-proxy)
- [Resources](#resources)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

# Help

Vim has brilliant built-in help. Its only one `:help` away, `:h operator` or `:h motion`.

- `:h cmd` normal mode _cmd_ help
- `:h i_cmd` insert mode _cmd_ help
- `:h v_cmd` visual mode _cmd_ help
- `:h c_cmd` command line _cmd_ help

# Operators

| Trigger | Effect                                              |
| ------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| `c`     | change                                              |
| `d`     | delete                                              |
| `y`     | yank                                                |
| `g~`    | swap case                                           |
| `gu`    | lower case                                          |
| `gU`    | upper case                                          |
| `g?`    | [ROT13](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ROT13) encode |
| `>`     | shift right                                         |
| `<`     | shift left                                          |
| `=`     | autoindent                                          |
| `!`     | filter through a program                            |

See `:h operator` for more. All of these support being combined with a motion (or a visual mode selection). Some examples:

- gUaw - make a word shout case
- dap - delete entire paragraph
- g?ap - ROT13 encode paragraph
- gUgU - shout case entire line (factoid: when two operators are invoked in duplicate, applies to current line)

# Object Selection

Learning object selectors is one of the best ways of becoming more efficient with Vim. Commands that start with `i` select inner objects without white space, and thus always select less text than their `a` equivalents. When you discover these can be paired with _operators_ (discussed above), _life changing_, e.g. `daw` delete a word, `gUis` uppercase inner sentence, and so on.

| Selector  | Effect                                    |
| --------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| `aw`      | a word                                    |
| `iw`      | inner word                                |
| `as`      | a sentence                                |
| `is`      | inner sentence                            |
| `ap`      | a paragraph                               |
| `ip`      | inner paragraph                           |
| `a]` `a[` | a `[]` block                              |
| `i]` `i[` | inner `[]` block                          |
| `a)` `a(` | a block                                   |
| `i)` `i(` | inner block                               |
| `a>` `a<` | a `<>` block                              |
| `i>` `i<` | inner `<>` block                          |
| `at`      | tag block, as in XML tags `<a>` to `</a>` |
| `it`      | inner tag block                           |
| `a}` `a{` | a `{}` block                              |
| `i}` `i{` | inner `{}` block                          |
| `a"` `a'` | quoted string including back ticks        |
| `i"` `i'` | quoted string including back ticks        |

# Windows

Leverage the built-in windows manager, which can do splits to view multiple files at the same time.

- `:sp` horizontal split
- `:vs` vertical split
- `ctrl+w o` - close all windows other than the active one.
- `ctrl+w x` - exchange active window with the next one.
- `ctrl+w c` - close the current window.
- `ctrl+w r` - rotate windows clockwise (or counter clockwise).

# The Edit (e) Command

Vim's built-in edit command, will present you with a nice file system explorer, for example `:e .` to present the current working directory.


# relativenumber

Makes line numbering relative. So good! Makes it fast to figure out how many lines up or down you need to move, to get to the line you want. Example, `14j` to jump 14 lines down.

      2 I usually clone my `scripts` git repo straight into my home
      1 ¬
    13      ln -nfs ~/git/scripts/linux/vim/vimrc ~/.vimrc¬
      1     ln -nfs ~/git/scripts/linux/vim ~/.vim¬
      2 ¬
      3 Vim has brilliant built-in help. Its only one `:help` away.

# Calculator

By typing `<C>r=` in insert mode, can do quick calculations are spit the out into the buffer.

For example, `<C>r=16*4<CR>` will output 128 where the cursor is currently located.

# Spell checking

Built in spell checker, enable with `:set spell`.

- `]s` jump to next error
- `[s` jump to previous error
- `z=` suggest corrections for current word
- `zg` add word to dictionary
- `zw` remove word from dictionary
- `zug` undo `zg` or `zw` for current word

# Sudo Save

Editing a file, but don't have privileges to save.

    :w !sudo tee %

`:w` writes to `sudo tee %`. `tee` flows the output of the file write to `%`, the name of the current file. I have a handy key binding `w!!` to do this:

    cmap w!! w !sudo tee %

# Normalise line endings

The classic `#!/bin/bash no such file or directory` error message. Shebang is busted likely due to encoding problems.

Litmus test:

```
$ head -1 <your_file> | od -c
```

Should show:

```
0000000   #   !   /   b   i   n   /   b   a   s   h  \n
```

Vim to the rescue:

```
vim <your_file>
:set ff=unix
:set nobomb
:wq
```

# Plugins

While core Vim functionality is like a rock, changing rarely, the plugin eco-system is where you can make Vim level up to doing tasks you commonly do with it. Consequently plugin selection can be quite personal based on specific langs one works with.

The Vim community seems obsessed with writing new plug-in managers, there's quite a bit of choice and tradeoffs, I have used a few in the past (Pathogen, Vundle) and as of 2020 have settled with [vim-plug](https://github.com/junegunn/vim-plug), which balances minimalism and functionality nicely.

Coming from bloated power tool IDE's like awesome JetBrains tools, in order to be remotely productive, I need to be able to efficiency locate and jump between files within a large code base.

## nnn.vim

Ditch NERDTree, and instead surface the [nnn](https://github.com/jarun/nnn) terminal file manager within Vim, genius.

- `<leader>n` start nnn in window
- `^G` discard selection

## denite

Buffer management and fuzzy finder. Quickly fuzzy find files recursively in a source tree e.g. `Person.java` or all shell scripts `.sh`. I've configured it to use [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep) under the hood.

Launch shortcuts:

- `;` browse currently open buffers
- `<leader>f` browse list of files in current directory
- `<leader>g` recursive grep from current directory for occurences of given term and close window if no results
- `<leader>j` recursive grep from current directory for occurences of word under cursor

Once launched shortcuts:

- `q or <Esc>` quit denite window
- `d` delete currenly selected file
- `p` preview currently selected file
- `<C-o> or i` switch to insert mode inside of filter prompt
- `<C-t>` open currently selected file in a new tab
- `<C-v>` open currently selected file a vertical split
- `<C-h>` open currently selected file in a horizontal split

## surround

Surround chunks of text with quotes or tags.

- `ysiw"` surround word with double quotes
- `v$S"` surround visual selection with double quotes
- `vipS<p>` surround paragraph with `<p></p>`
- `cs"'` change double quotes to single quotes

## vim-markdown-toc

Make a table of contents inferred from markdown heading tags.

- `:GenTocGFM`
- `:GenTocGitLab`
- `:UpdateToc`

## vim-easy-align

OCD much? This helps to line up code based on a particular symbol.

- `vipga=` visual select code block, align all `=` symbols by padding out

## vim-commentary

Smart commenting based on the file type.

- `gcc` comment current line
- `gc<motion>` comment motion based selection e.g. `gcap` for paragraph selection

## vim-easy-motion

Vim motioning on steroids! Creates micro jumps based on a search pattern you provide, and dims down the buffer with each highlight getting a unique id you can hit.

- `<leader><leader>w` beginning of all words
- `<leader><leader>fo` motion all `o` characters going forward
- `<leader><leader>to` motion before (till) `o` characters
- `<leader><leader>n` jump to latest `/` or `?`
- `<leader><leader>s` search

## vim-better-whitespace

Utilities to highlight and remove redundant use of whitespace.

- `:EnableWhitespace`
- `:DisableWhitespace`
- `ToggleWhitespace`
- `:StripWhitespace`

## vim-prettier

- `<leader>p` run the current buffer through prettier

## vim-css-color

Colorise hex codes in the buffer based on CSS standards.

## coc.nvim

> An LSP based completion framework and language server client which supports extension features of VSCode.

Like VSCode, Emacs and many others, can sit upon the [Langserver.org](https://langserver.org/) Protocol (LSP) originally created by Microsoft, to provide language aware intelligence such as auto complete, go to definition and find all references.

To install a coc extension that supports a language, have a look on [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/search?q=keywords%3Acoc.nvim) for one, and install with `CocInstall` for example to install Go language completion `CocInstall coc-gocode`. Make sure to also install [gocode](https://github.com/nsf/gocode) for this particular plugin, with a quick `go get -u github.com/nsf/gocode`.

CoC Go support:

You can manually register LSP servers in jsonc format in the `~/.config/nvim/coc-settings.json` (use `:CocConfig` to auto jump you to this file). For example, the below registers `gopls`, Google's offical LSP for golang:

```json
{
    "languageserver": {
    "golang": {
        "command": "gopls",
        "args": [],
        "rootPatterns": ["go.mod", ".vim/", ".git/", ".hg/"],
        "filetypes": ["go"]
    }
    }
}
```

CoC web dev support (JS, ES6 and CSS):

    :CocInstall coc-tsserver coc-eslint coc-json coc-prettier coc-css

# Setup behind a proxy

Getting my Vim setup on a corporate network.

TODO: Investigate containerising it.

- `git config --global http.proxy http://proxy.evilcorp.com:8080`
- nnn.vim: nnn
- prettier: node v10+
- denite: python3, pip3 install --user pynvim
- coc.nvim:
  - node v10+
  - [yarn](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/en/docs/install/#debian-stable)
  - `yarn config set proxy http://proxy.evilcorp.com:8080`
  - `yarn config set https-proxy http://proxy.evilcorp.com:8080`

# Resources

- [Smash into Vim](https://airbladesoftware.com/peepcode-vim/) the awesome PeepCode screencast that help me break through the learning curve back in 2010.
- [Vim Cheat Sheet](https://vim.rtorr.com/) good quick reference.
- [A guide to modern Web Development with (Neo)vim](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/a-guide-to-modern-web-development-with-neo-vim-333f7efbf8e2) convinced me that coc and denite are really the two power plugins needed, integration with ripgrep and LSP (lang server protocol) for autocompletion is unreal.
- [How I'm still not using GUIs in 2019: A guide to the terminal](https://lucasfcosta.com/2019/02/10/terminal-guide-2019.html) excitement around (neo)Vim, some good basic tips, I recommend using `coc` over `ycm` for autocompletion, which integrates with the VSCode autocomplete engine.
