---
layout: post
title: "neomutt setup on fastmail (2022 edition)"
slug: "mutt"
date: "2012-08-18 21:03:40+10:00"
lastmod: "2022-02-26 15:44:24+11:00"
comments: false
categories:
    - linux
tags:
    - mutt
    - neomutt
    - mail
    - isync
    - msmtp
    - pass
    - abook
    - gpg
    - pam-gnupg
    - linux
---

-   [Intro](#intro)
-   [Getting started with mutt](#getting-started-with-mutt)
-   [2022 setup](#2022-setup)
-   [GPG crypto](#gpg-crypto)
-   [Address book integration](#address-book-integration)
-   [pam-gnupg](#pam-gnupg)

## Intro

If you haven't heard of `mutt` you're missing out.

> Mutt is a small but very powerful text-based mail client for UNIX operating systems

It's a command line based mail reader (MUA). The [neomutt](https://github.com/neomutt/neomutt) project is a contemporary fork of the original `mutt` with added features, patch sets and fixes.

I started seriously using `mutt` as my full-time mail client in 2012. I found its simplicity refreshing. It quickly became apparent how much useless baggage modern graphical mail clients (e.g., thunderbird, outlook, etc) actually bog you down with, not to mention the harrowing way they actually encode mail. Its taken me a long time to appreciate this:

> All mail clients suck. This one just sucks less.

`mutt` is minimal however surprisingly extensible. As is the case with most well designed software, its UNIX design roots becomes apparent; do one thing well while allowing other complimentary programs to bolster it. Such as periodic IMAP polling using `cron` and `isync`, or address book integration using `abook`, or cryptography support using `gpg`. In the same way `git` revolutionised VCS by being distributed-first, `mutt` when paired with `isync`, mailboxes are local fully fledged copies, making it possible to work with your email in a disconnected fashion. This is powerful; you can still compose emails while offline (e.g., on a flight or on the road), search over all your email whenever you like with `notmuch` and just sleep better at night knowing your email is backed up on your own hardware.

Like all worthy endeavours there is effort and time involved. You're going to need to understand how to craft a `neomuttrc`. The [docs](https://neomutt.org/guide/) are dense and the number of configuration levers you can pull can seem overwhelming.

## Getting started with mutt

If you're starting out on your `mutt` journey for the first time, I highly recommend checking out the [mutt-wizard](https://github.com/LukeSmithxyz/mutt-wizard) project started by [Luke Smith](https://lukesmith.xyz/). Luke is a smart unit with a PhD in linguistics. His [configuration files](https://github.com/LukeSmithxyz/voidrice) are also a wealth of knowledge. I can also highly recommend checking out [HexDSL](https://hexdsl.com/) and his [dots](https://gitlab.com/hexdsl/dots) repo, from which I have learned so much.

## 2022 setup

My current (2022) terminal based mail setup is a mash-up of:

-   [fastmail](https://www.fastmail.com/) as of 2022 is my paid for mail/contacts/calendar provider. Exceptional value for money, privacy controls and features technical users (like me) care deeply about. I'm so happy after being on gmail since 2005
-   `neomutt` as my MUA
-   `isync` IMAP downloads and syncs mail locally, run by `cron` periodically `*/30 * * * * mbsync -a`. See my [.mbsyncrc](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bm4cs/dots/master/.mbsyncrc) for a working fastmail setup
-   `msmtp` to send outgoing email using SMTP
-   `pass` to safely encrypt credentials in my publicly viewable [dot files](https://github.com/bm4cs/dots/)
-   `pam-gnupg` a PAM module that hands over your login password to `gpg-agent`, i.e., automatically log into GPG once logged into your system, see [doco](https://github.com/cruegge/pam-gnupg) for setup. On Debian I manually built it as described [below](#pam-gnupg)
-   `lynx` to view HTML encoded emails (gross)
-   `abook` command line based address book, using tab in the recipient field within `neomutt` will auto-suggest
-   `notmuch` index and search mail, `ctrl-f` in `mutt` will trigger this. Run `notmuch setup` if you don't have a `~/.notmuch-config` yet
-   `gpg` for crypto

My 2022 [neomuttrc](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bm4cs/dots/master/.config/neomutt/neomuttrhttps://raw.githubusercontent.com/bm4cs/dots/master/.config/neomutt/neomuttrcc) integrates with the above and customises `neovim` further:

-   `vim` keys where possible
-   `neovim` as default editor
-   reads encrypted credentials using `pass`
-   has a signature block
-   configures each fastmail mailbox individually as a channel in `~/.mbsyncrc`
-   push toast notifications when new mail arrives `notify-send`
-   logical key binds (`gi` go to inbox, `Mi` move to inbox, `Ci` copy to inbox) possible targets `i` inbox, `a` archive, `s` sent, `d` drafts, `t` trash.
-   helpful regex highlights
-   contacts integration with `abook`

## GPG crypto

Integrates `gpg`. Handy for encrypting, decrypting, creating and validating digital signatures all conveniently within `mutt`:

1. Install `gpg`
1. Copy `/usr/share/doc/neomutt/samples/gpg.rc` to `~/.config/neomutt/`
1. Set the default key, by grabbing the last 8 hex digits from the fingerprint of your public key, by running `gpg --list-keys`
1. After composing mail in mutt, but before sending, hit `p` to bring up gpg options (such as encrypt, sign, both)
1. When reading mail, mutt will try to automatically decrypt and verify signatures destined to you

## Address book integration

`abook` is a stand-alone TUI program dedicated to contact management. Contacts are stored in a plain text, human-readable database. How refreshing!

A thank you to [José María Mateos](https://rinzewind.org/blog-en/2018/how-to-sync-fastmails-carddav-to-use-with-mutt-abook.html) who pointed out fastmail have a REST API for pulling your contacts back as a single vcard dump:

```
https://carddav.fastmail.com/dav/addressbooks/user/<username@domain.tld>/default
```

Here is a bash script to glue it up and place the output at `~/.abook/addressbook`:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

tmpfile=$(mktemp)
destfile=$(mktemp)

wget -q https://carddav.fastmail.com/dav/addressbooks/user/ben@bencode.io/Default \
    --user ben@bencode.io \
    --password $(pass show fastmail | head -n 1) \
    -O $tmpfile

abook --convert \
    --informat vcard \
    --infile $tmpfile \
    --outformat abook \
    --outfile $destfile

rm $tmpfile
chmod 600 $destfile
mv $destfile ~/.abook/addressbook
```

1. Start `abook` which brings a TUI (text user interface) up, you should see all your contacts neatly organised.
1. In `mutt`, compose a new mail, enter part of the name of a known contact (e.g. 'Tom') and hit TAB to query your `abook` database.
1. Schedule the above script `fastmail-abook-sync` in `cron` to run periodically `0 19 * * * fastmail-abook-sync`

## pam-gnupg

This is needed to automatically schedule `isync` to run using `cron`. Given `pass` (a `gpg` frontend) is being used to securely bind credentials into the various config files, `pass` will interactively prompt for the `gpg` passphrase to your secret key. Interactive user prompting doesn't work too well with `cron` after all.

Luckily [pam-gnupg](https://github.com/cruegge/pam-gnupg) solves this:

> A PAM module that hands over your login password to gpg-agent, which can be useful if you are using a GnuPG-based password manager like pass.

In essence, all `pam-gnupg` does is to send the password as entered in the login prompt to `gpg-agent`. Therefore its important that your user account password is the same as the passphrase on your GPG key.

As this isn't a widely used piece of software (e.g., doesn't exist in the big repos for distros like Debian). Time to dust off `automake` and `gcc`:

```shell
sudo apt install libpam0g-dev     # install pam development headers
g clone git@github.com:cruegge/pam-gnupg.git
./autogen.sh
./configure
make
sudo make install
```

On Debian as `root` edit `/etc/pam.d/login` (`system-local-login` on Arch) adding the following block to the end:

```
auth     optional  pam_gnupg.so store-only
session  optional  pam_gnupg.so
```

Create `~/.gnupg/gpg-agent.conf` with the following:

```
allow-preset-passphrase
max-cache-ttl 86400
```

Create `~/.pam-gnupg` adding the 40 character `gpg` keygrip identifier of the encryption subkey you want to set the password for:

```
$ gpg -K --with-keygrip
sec   rsa2048 2018-11-16 [SC]
      9AB5DD43C5E5FD40475FA6DA0D776275F7F5B2E7
      Keygrip = 6F4ABB77A88E922406BCE6627AFEEE2363914B76
uid           [ultimate] Chris Ruegge <mail@cxcs.de>
ssb   rsa2048 2018-11-16 [E]
      Keygrip = FBDEAD7B0C484CDC85F1CF70352833EB0C921D58

$ echo FBDEAD7B0C484CDC85F1CF70352833EB0C921D58 > ~/.pam-gnupg
```

Finally make sure the user account password is identical to the gpg passphrase. I chose to update my gpg passphrase:

```
$ gpg --list-keys
pub   4096R/9AABBCD8 2013-10-04
uid                  Home Nas Server (Home Nas Server Backup)
sub   4096R/149D60C7 2013-10-04

$ gpg --edit-key 9AABBCD8

gpg> passwd
gpg> save
```

Time to test it out, `sudo reboot` and login. If you carefully followed the above steps you will now be able to run `pass show fastmail` without any additional password prompting. More usefully this means `cron` can now `mbsync` for you.
