---
layout: post
title: "Vagrant"
date: "2017-12-30 20:09:01"
comments: false
categories:
- linux
---

When something becomes messy in the software industry, we have the habit of tucking the problems away behind abstractions. To me Vagrant is simply an abstraction layer for working with a range of hypervisors (libvirt, VirtualBox, VMWare, Hyper-V, Docker and more), in a reliable and consistent manner.

By articulating VM's as a simple text based (Ruby) configuration file, a `Vagrantfile`, achieve greater simplicity, portability across systems, and consistency which could theoretically be used with any virtual environment running on top of any other system.

With Vagrant an environment can now be reliably defined in a text based format, making it easy to back up, modify, share, and manage with revision control. It also means that rather than sharing a whole virtual machine image, which could be many gigabytes, a simple text file can be shared instead.


# Workflow

1. `dnf install vagrant`
2. Checkout available boxes on the [HashiCorp Vagrant Cloud](https://app.vagrantup.com/boxes/search). I wanted a CentOS box, which is published as `centos/7`. Make sure the box you go for actually supports the underlying hypervisor technology you plan on running, `libvirt` in my case. A box is used as an initial image to clone from, the base image itself is never modified.
3. `vagrant box add centos/7` to download the box locally (global to the user).
4. `vagrant init centos/7` to boilerplate a [`Vagrantfile`](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/vagrantfile/) to get started with. Below is a basic `Vagrantfile`. Of course can be heavily [customised](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/vagrantfile/) to make the VM's behave just how you need.
5. Create the `bootstrap.sh` script in the same working directory as the `Vagrantfile`. Vagrant takes care of automatically synchronising this directory on the host, with the guest.
6. `vagrant up`
7. Share the `Vagrantfile` with the dev team, by commiting it into the git repo.



**Vagrantfile**

{% highlight ruby %}
Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  config.vm.box = "centos/7"
  config.vm.box_check_update = false
  config.vm.network "forwarded_port", guest: 80, host: 4567

  config.vm.provider "libvirt" do |libvirt|
    libvirt.memory = 1024
    libvirt.cpus = 2
  end

  config.vm.provision :shell, path: "bootstrap.sh"
end
{% endhighlight %}

A couple of highlights with this little `Vagrantfile`. First, how provider specific customisations can be made, in this case with the [libvirt Vagrant provider](https://github.com/vagrant-libvirt/vagrant-libvirt). Second, the use of a bash script provisioner, which will invoke `bootstrap.sh` which will install, configure and start the `httpd` package (the Apache web server).


**bootstrap.sh**

{% highlight bash %}
#!/usr/bin/env bash

yum install -y httpd
if ! [ -L /var/www ]; then
  rm -rf /var/www
  ln -fs /vagrant /var/www
fi

systemctl enable httpd
systemctl start httpd
{% endhighlight %}




# libvirt Password Prompts

Non-root users need to be given access to the libvirt socket, via Policy Kit.

    vim /etc/polkit-1/localauthority/50-local.d/vagrant.pkla

With this content (for my account ben):

    [Allow ben libvirt management permissions]
    Identity=unix-user:ben
    Action=org.libvirt.unix.manage
    ResultAny=yes
    ResultInactive=yes
    ResultActive=yes


# Tips

Never symlink the `/var/lib/libvirt/images`. Vagrant will spit its dummy.


By default `/vagrant` in the guest will be synced with the host, using rsync. To force a sync can use this command `vagrant rsync`

Provisioning (the custom bootstrapping activities such as shell scripts) can be retriggered on running machines with `vagrant reload --provision`

Vagrant boxes are cached locally under `~/vagrant.d` like this:

    $ tree ~/.vagrant.d/
    /home/ben/.vagrant.d/
    ├── boxes
    │   └── centos-VAGRANTSLASH-7
    │       ├── 1710.01
    │       │   └── libvirt
    │       │       ├── box.img
    │       │       ├── metadata.json
    │       │       └── Vagrantfile
    │       └── metadata_url
    ├── data
    │   ├── checkpoint_cache
    │   ├── checkpoint_signature
    │   ├── lock.dotlock.lock
    │   └── machine-index
    │       ├── index
    │       └── index.lock
    ├── gems
    ├── insecure_private_key
    ├── plugins.json
    ├── rgloader
    │   └── loader.rb
    ├── setup_version
    └── tmp
        └── box0c443504b9553b794ce156940721489e599630ab



