---
layout: post
title: "Computer Heros"
date: "2017-04-27 22:12:10"
comments: false
categories:
- geek
---

Some heros in the world of computer science.



# Founding Fathers (pre 1960)

### George Boole (1815 - 1864)

Boolean algegra. Papers *The Mathematical Analysis of Logic* (1847), and *An Investigation of the Laws of Thought* (1854).


### Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob Frege (1848 - 1925)

Analytic philosophy. Developed modern logic in the Begriffsschrift and work in the foundations of mathematics. Books *The Foundations of Arithmetic*, *On Sense and Reference*  and *The Thought*. 


### Alan Turing (1912 - 1954)

The father of theoretical computer science. Formalised the concepts of algorithm and computation through the notion of a *Universal Machine* (i.e Turing Machine) in his seminal paper *On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem*.

### John von Neumann  (1903 - 1957)

Implementer of the "Turing Machine".

### Mauris Wilks

EDSAC, the first practical implementation of von-neumann architecture.





# Golden Age (1960-90)

### Tony Hoare (1934)

Hoare logic (for verifying correctness), formalised the interaction of concurrent processes with [communicating sequential processes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communicating_sequential_processes) (CSP), and invented the quicksort algorithm.


### John McCarthy

Creator of LISP. First dynamic language.


### Ken Thompson

Unix. The B programming language. The Go programming language. Co-creator of the Plan 9 operating system. Regular expressions, UTF-8 encoding, and text editors QED and `ed`.


### Dennis Ritchie (1941-2011)

The C programming language and Unix. Commonly known by his username `dmr`.


### Douglas McIlroy (1932)

Unix pipes, and software componentization.



### Bill Joy

BSD and vi. Paper *Why The Future Doesn't Need Us*.


### Joe Armstrong

Erlang. Fault tolerant distributed systems.


### Alan Kay

OO. SmallTalk. Squeak.


### Larry Wall

Perl.


### Richard Stallman

GNU (GNU Not UNIX).

### Linus Torvalds

The Linux kernel and Git.

### David Cutler

VMS and Windows NT kernel.


### Rob Pike

golang, SysV, X Windows.


### Rich Hickey

Clojure.



# Internet Age (1990 - 2000)



### Robert Griesemer

Golang.


### Bryan Cantrill

DTrace.


