---
layout: post
draft: false
title: "LXC (Lexy)"
date: "2018-01-18 20:56:01"
lastmod: "2018-01-18 20:56:01"
comments: false
categories:
    - linux
tags:
    - containers
---

Born in 2008, [LXC](https://linuxcontainers.org) (pronouced lexy) is a userspace interface for the Linux kernel containment features, that enables the creation and management of application containers.

LXC leverages a number of kernel features to contain processes:

-   Kernel namespaces (ipc, uts, mount, pid, network and user)
-   Apparmor and SELinux profiles
-   Seccomp policies
-   Chroots (using pivot_root)
-   Kernel capabilities
-   CGroups (control groups)

LXC containers are often considered as something in between a chroot and a full blown VM. The goal of LXC is to create an environment as close as possible to a standard Linux installation, without the need for a separate kernel.

Kudos to [Dave Cohen](https://twitter.com/tutorialinux) who put together a nice [LXC video series](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLtK75qxsQaMLwF_uCB_CK8wIE17D-afuJ), that gets straight to the point. What follows are my notes based on his videos. Dave's videos are actually based on [Stéphane Graber's](https://stgraber.org/2013/12/20/lxc-1-0-blog-post-series/) 2013 LXC 1.0 blog post series.

# LXC in 5 steps

1. Install it. On a hat based distro with `yum install epel-release` then `yum install lxc lxc-extra lxc-templates`. `lxc-extra` includes helpful scripts such as `lxc-ls`. Verify with `lxc-checkconfig`.
2. Create containers like this `lxc-create -t centos -n web1`. The container templates `-t` available can be found in `/usr/share/lxc/templates`. On first use will download the base file system for the chosen template, dumping it in /var/cache e.g. `/var/cache/lxc/centos/x86_64/7/`. LXC containers are stored in `/var/lib/lxc`. A temporary root password to log into the container is placed here `/var/lib/lxc/web1/tmp_root_pass`.
3. Spark it up with `lxc-start -n web1 -d`. The `-d` runs it in daemon mode, preventing it from taking over stdout and stdin.
4. Get a state of play with `lxc-ls -f` (with fancy option)
5. When you're ready to jump into a container, `lxc-attach -n web1`

## Bonus Options

### Binding to a specific TTY

    lxc-start -n web1 -c /dev/tty4 &

### Freezing

LXC employs the _freezer_ cgroup to freeze all running processes within a container, placing them in the blocked state until thawed. The state of LXC containers within the freezer cgroup can be queried using the `/sys` (like `/proc`) virtual file system, for example:

    # cat /sys/fs/cgroup/freezer/lxc/web1/freezer.state
    THAWED

`lxc-freeze -n web1` will initiate the freeze, and `lxc-unfreeze -n web1` will defrost it again.

### Kill a container (lxc-stop -k)

`lxc-stop -n web1 -k`, the optional `-k` switch will send a SIGTERM (15).

# Configuration

## Templates

Available LXC templates, which are just shell scripts, live in `/usr/share/lxc/templates`.

    # ls /usr/share/lxc/templates
    lxc-alpine    lxc-archlinux  lxc-centos  lxc-debian    lxc-fedora  lxc-openmandriva  lxc-oracle  lxc-sshd    lxc-ubuntu-cloud
    lxc-altlinux  lxc-busybox    lxc-cirros  lxc-download  lxc-gentoo  lxc-opensuse      lxc-plamo   lxc-ubuntu

## rootfs

Each LXC container created, get a rootfs placed under `/var/lib/lxc`. For a container named _web1_:

    # ls /var/lib/lxc/web1/rootfs
    bin  boot  dev  etc  home  lib  lib64  media  mnt  opt  proc  root  run  sbin  selinux  srv  sys  tmp  usr  var

## config

Each LXC container is given its own `config` file, example `/var/lib/lxc/web1/config`. For documentation on this config, checkout `man 5 lxc.container.conf`. The boilerplate config will look like this:

    # Template used to create this container: /usr/share/lxc/templates/lxc-centos
    # Parameters passed to the template:
    # For additional config options, please look at lxc.container.conf(5)
    lxc.network.type = veth
    lxc.network.flags = up
    lxc.network.link = virbr0
    lxc.network.hwaddr = fe:c0:1f:81:f8:26
    lxc.rootfs = /var/lib/lxc/web1/rootfs

    # Include common configuration
    lxc.include = /usr/share/lxc/config/centos.common.conf

    lxc.arch = x86_64
    lxc.utsname = web1

    lxc.autodev = 1

    # When using LXC with apparmor, uncomment the next line to run unconfined:
    #lxc.aa_profile = unconfined

    # example simple networking setup, uncomment to enable
    #lxc.network.type = veth
    #lxc.network.flags = up
    #lxc.network.link = lxcbr0
    #lxc.network.name = eth0
    # Additional example for veth network type
    #    static MAC address,
    #lxc.network.hwaddr = 00:16:3e:77:52:20
    #    persistent veth device name on host side
    #        Note: This may potentially collide with other containers of same name!
    #lxc.network.veth.pair = v-web1-e0

Lets make some changes to get a static IP, control the boot order, assign the container to 1+ groups, and auto start when the host boots.

    lxc.network.ipv4 = 192.168.124.140/24 192.168.124.255
    lxc.network.ipv4.gateway = auto

    lxc.start.auto = 1 #1 = boot at host startup
    lxc.start.delay = 15 #15 second delay prior to boot
    lxc.start.order = 10 #the higher the number, the higher the priority

    #lxc.group = web,dns #assigns the container to 1 or more groups, which can then be managed in chunks

Beware of the `lxc.group`, which renders the `lxc.start.auto` option useless.

The final steps to getting a static IP, is to disable DHCP in the network config within the container itself. On CentOS for example:

    # vi /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0

## Managing Auto Start

LXC containers, as shown, can be conveniently grouped, and auto started, easing the pain of starting and stopping indvidual containers all the time. The `lxc-autostart` command supports a `-L` (list) option that will show in priority order the auto boot sequence it is aware of.

    # lxc-autostart -L
    psql-1 15
    psql-2 15
    rabbit-mq 15
    nginx-1 15
    ngnix-2 15

The order of the list shows the priority. The value that follows the container name, is the number of seconds it will delay before proceeding to auto-boot the next container.

# Unprivileged Containers

uidmap
