---
layout: post
title: "Arch Linux"
slug: "arch"
date: "2019-04-06 11:32:10+11:00"
lastmod: "2023-09-30 16:35:38+11:00"
comments: false
categories:
  - linux
tags:
  - arch
  - suckless
  - dwm
---

After witnessing insane minimalism paired with a tiler (tiling window manager), knew it was my time to take the pilgrimage to Arch Linux.

Some characteristics that make Arch unique:

- [The Arch Way](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Arch_terminology#The_Arch_Way) embody the principles behind Arch Linux; simplicity, modernity, pragmatism, user centrality and versatility.
- Forces one to build the system up by hand.
- This encourages you to question the role of each component of the system, and available options to satisfy that component (e.g. the terminal emulator).
- The result is a highly tailored and minimal system that meets precisely your needs.
- Practical and pragmatic documentation. The [Arch Wiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/) is the gold standard when it comes to documentation.
- The Arch User Repository (AUR) is a treasure chest of pre-packaged useful recent software. Somehow every program I've ever needed has been available on AUR.
- Rolling upgrades.

Arch was born in 2001, when Canadian programmer Judd Vinet, inspired by the elegance of systems such as Slackware and the BSD's, set out to build his own distro based on a similar ethos. The first formal release, 0.1, dropped on March 11, 2002.

- [Pre Install](#pre-install)
  - [Boot disk](#boot-disk)
  - [Post boot](#post-boot)
  - [Partitioning](#partitioning)
  - [System encryption](#system-encryption)
  - [LVM](#lvm)
  - [Format partitions (file systems)](#format-partitions-file-systems)
- [Mount partitions](#mount-partitions)
- [Installation](#installation)
  - [Add pacman mirror](#add-pacman-mirror)
  - [Install Arch with pacstrap](#install-arch-with-pacstrap)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [fstab and crypttab](#fstab-and-crypttab)
  - [chroot](#chroot)
  - [root password](#root-password)
  - [Localisation](#localisation)
  - [Time zone](#time-zone)
  - [Networking](#networking)
  - [ramdisk](#ramdisk)
  - [Boot loader (GRUB)](#boot-loader-grub)
- [Reboot](#reboot)
- [Post boot](#post-boot-1)
  - [WiFi](#wifi)
  - [Add users](#add-users)
  - [GPU drivers](#gpu-drivers)
  - [Essential applications](#essential-applications)
  - [Desktop Environment (DE) vs Window Manager (WM)](#desktop-environment-de-vs-window-manager-wm)
    - [dwm](#dwm)
  - [Default applications](#default-applications)
  - [Ricing](#ricing)
    - [Wallpaper](#wallpaper)
    - [Sound](#sound)
    - [Load Xresources at startup](#load-xresources-at-startup)
    - [Making GTK and QT apps pretty](#making-gtk-and-qt-apps-pretty)
    - [Clock in status bar](#clock-in-status-bar)
- [Virtualisation](#virtualisation)
  - [What if the `default` network interface is not listed](#what-if-the-default-network-interface-is-not-listed)
  - [How to extend / increase a Windows Partition on KVM QEMU VM](#how-to-extend--increase-a-windows-partition-on-kvm-qemu-vm)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
  - [Error loading vmlinuz-linux: not found](#error-loading-vmlinuz-linux-not-found)
  - [pacman - Failed to commit transaction (conflicting files)](#pacman---failed-to-commit-transaction-conflicting-files)
  - [invalid or corrupted package (PGP signature)](#invalid-or-corrupted-package-pgp-signature)
  - [JetBrains GoLand madness](#jetbrains-goland-madness)
    - [Window reparenting madness](#window-reparenting-madness)
    - [Incorrect editor warnings and errors](#incorrect-editor-warnings-and-errors)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

# Pre Install

## Boot disk

To bootstrap the install process, a boot key is the way to go. Obtain the latest `iso` image, and block write it to a USB drive using `dd`. `dd` (aka disk destroyer to some) trusts you know what you're doing and can destroy data very easily if not used correctly.

Use `lsblk` to determine the mapped device name (e.g. `/dev/sdb`). When ready, pull the trigger and flash the drive with arch:

    dd if=Downloads/archlinux-2019.03.01-x86_64.iso of=/dev/sdb status="progress"

Boot the target system on the new boot drive. If all goes well, you will end up on a bash shell, in the temporary boot preparation system provided by Arch.

## Post boot

Get network connectivity:

    ip l
    iwctl
    [iwctl]# device list
    [iwctl]# station wlan0 connect <SSID_HERE>
    [iwctl]# station wlan0 show
    [iwctl]# quit
    ip l

## Partitioning

UEFI (supports newer 64-bit based GPT) or BIOS (based on traditional MBR). If the below sys node doesn't exist, go BIOS:

    ls /sys/firmware/efi/efivars

Determine the target block device (e.g. an SSD) for installation, using `lsblk`.

Assuming a BIOS compatible system, will go with `fdisk` (not `gdisk`) for the partitioning setup:

    fdisk /dev/nvme0n1

`fdisk` shortcuts:

- `m` help
- `p` print partition table
- `d` delete
- `n` new

In a nutshell, blow away any existing partitions (`d`), and create 4 new (`n`) primary partitions. Note when specifying the _last sector_ can size with `+200M` style syntax, `+200M` is 200MiB, `+50G` is 50GiB. I cut my ~500GB drive up into the following partiions:

1. 100M for EFI (type 0xef00)
2. 250M for boot (type 0x8300)
3. The remainder for LVM (type 0x8300)

## System encryption

```
cryptsetup -y -v luksFormat /dev/nvme0n1p3
cryptsetup open /dev/nvme0n1p3 luks
```

## LVM

On top of the dm-create device mapper target named `luks`, setup logical volume manager for flexibility down the road:

note: Rule of thumb for swap is 150% of total system memory

```sh
pvcreate /dev/mapper/luks
vgcreate vg /dev/mapper/luks
lvcreate --size 30G vg --name swap
lvcreate -l +100%FREE vg --name root
```

## Format partitions (file systems)

```sh
mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/nvme0n1p1
mkfs.ext2 /dev/nvme0n1p2
mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/vg-root
mkswap /dev/mapper/vg-swap
```

# Mount partitions

Now its time to mount these new partitions into the Arch bootstrapped system, so they be used.

The 3 partitions will be mounted into the current Arch boot preparation systems file system tree under `/mnt` so a `chroot` can occur, and then system installation. First mount the root partition, then the _boot_ partition within the _root_ mount under `/mnt/boot`, and finally the EFI partition within the `/mnt/boot/efi`:

```sh
mount /dev/mapper/vg-root /mnt
swapon /dev/maper/vg-swap
mount --mkdir /dev/nvme0n1p2 /mnt/boot
mount --mkdir /dev/nvme0n1p1 /mnt/boot/efi
```

# Installation

## Add pacman mirror

Update `/etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist` as desired. My ISP has an unmetered mirror:

```
Server = http://mirror.internode.on.net/pub/archlinux/$repo/os/$arch
```

## Install Arch with pacstrap

The `pacstrap` script will install the `base`, and if desired other [package groups](https://www.archlinux.org/groups/x86_64/), such as [base-devel](https://www.archlinux.org/groups/x86_64/base-devel/) for common build related programs.

```sh
pacstrap /mnt base base-devel grub-efi-x86_64 git efibootmgr networkmanager dialog wpa_supplicant dhcpcd mkinitcpio lvm2 linux-hardened linux-firmware neovim tmux
```

# Configuration

## fstab and crypttab

So mounts are automatically applied as part of the system boot process, add them to `/etc/fstab` as UUID's, which are more robust than device names which can change, the `-U` option on `genfstab` makes this a breeze:

```bash
genfstab -U /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab
nvim /mnt/etc/fstab
# Add this:
# tmpfs	/tmp	tmpfs	defaults,noatime,mode=1777	0	0
```

## chroot

Now to change root into the new system, from the Arch boot preparation system:

```bash
arch-chroot /mnt
```

## root password

Set the password for the root account with `passwd`

## Localisation

Uncomment `en_US.UTF-8` and `UTF-8` in `/etc/locale.gen`, and generate:

```
locale-gen
```

Set language:

```
echo LANG=en_US.UTF-8 >> /etc/locale.conf
echo LANGUAGE=en_US >> /etc/locale.conf
echo LC_ALL=C >> /etc/locale.conf
```

## Time zone

Symlink in the appropriate zone definition:

    ln -sf /usr/share/zoneinfo/Australia/Canberra /etc/localtime

Run `hwclock --systohc` to generate `/etc/adjtime`

## Networking

- Create `/etc/hostname`, and define a name for the host.
- Edit `/etc/hosts` for loopback based on the defined hostname above, `127.0.1.1 myhostname.localdomain myhostname`
- Install NetworkManager which provides persistent network configuration across reboots, `pacman -S networkmanager` and enable it `systemctl enable NetworkManager`

## ramdisk

Edit `/etc/mkinitcpio.conf`:

- Add `ext4` to `MODULES`
- Add `encrypt` and `lvm2` to `HOOKS` before filesystems it should look like the below
- Ensure the package `lvm2` is installed
- `mkinitcpio -P`

```
HOOKS=(base udev autodetect modconf kms keyboard keymap consolefont block encrypt lvm2 filesystems fsck)
```


## Boot loader (GRUB)

Several boot loaders are [supported](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Arch_boot_process#Boot_loader), I stuck with GRUB.

```sh
pacman -S grub
grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --bootloader-id=grub_uefi --recheck
grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg
```

Edits to `/etc/default/grub`:

- Uncomment `GRUB_TERMINAL_OUTPUT=console` (graphical = bloat)
- Add `quiet loglevel=3` to `GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT` to suppress kernel logs spewing into login prompt

If targeting a LUKS device, need to pass kernel params from the boot loader to trigger a decryption as part of the boot process.

Again in `/etc/default/grub`, edit to `GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX` to include `cryptdevice=/dev/nvme0n1p3:luks:allow-discards root=/dev/vg/root`

# Reboot

A minimal base system is installed and configured, and ready to be used.

- Escape chroot with ctrl+d or `exit`.
- Unmount everything `umount -R /mnt`, `lsblk` should confirm this.
- `reboot`
- Remove the USB drive

# Post boot

## WiFi

Unfortunately wifi settings were not persisted. Fix with network manager:

    nmcli dev wifi connect wifi-sid-goes-here password wifi-password-goes-here

Also make sure to that `wifi-menu` is functional, by installing the `dialog` package. `netctl` is useful for troubleshooting. Ensure that the network profile for the wifi is enabled using `netctl`.

See [archwiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/NetworkManager#nmcli_examples):

- `nmcli device wifi list` sniff currently available wifi ssids in range
- `nmcli connection show` show active connection/s
- `nmcli device wifi connect Jeneffer password S3CR3T` connect to ssid
- `nmcli device wifi connect Jeneffer password S3CR3T hidden yes` connect to hidden ssid
- `nmcli connection up uuid UUID` reconnect a disconnected interface
- `nmcli device` list all interfaces and their state
- `mcli device disconnect wlp3s0` disconnect an interface
- `nmcli radio wifi off` disable wifi radio

## Add users

    useradd -m -g wheel ben
    passwd ben
    sudo vi /etc/sudoers

Uncomment (line 85) to allow members of the wheel group to sudo with (or without) password prompting:

    %wheel ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL

## GPU drivers

I've got a mix of machines with nvidia and amd accelerators. Just follow the bouncing ball on the appropriate arch wiki:

- [AMDGPU](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/AMDGPU) for the open source AMD based driver
- [NVIDIA](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/NVIDIA) the proprietary blob

Once installed verify with some benchmarks, before installing steam. Install `glmark2` from the AUR, then bench.

    $ glmark2
    =======================================================
        glmark2 2014.03
    =======================================================
        OpenGL Information
        GL_VENDOR:     X.Org
        GL_RENDERER:   AMD Radeon (TM) RX 480 Graphics (POLARIS10, DRM 3.35.0, 5.4.2-arch1-1, LLVM 9.0.0)
        GL_VERSION:    4.5 (Compatibility Profile) Mesa 19.2.7
    =======================================================
    [build] use-vbo=false: FPS: 9521 FrameTime: 0.105 ms
    [build] use-vbo=true: FPS: 14981 FrameTime: 0.067 ms
    [texture] texture-filter=nearest: FPS: 15094 FrameTime: 0.066 ms
    [texture] texture-filter=linear: FPS: 15087 FrameTime: 0.066 ms
    [texture] texture-filter=mipmap: FPS: 14676 FrameTime: 0.068 ms
    [shading] shading=gouraud: FPS: 14161 FrameTime: 0.071 ms
    [shading] shading=blinn-phong-inf: FPS: 14188 FrameTime: 0.070 ms
    [shading] shading=phong: FPS: 14027 FrameTime: 0.071 ms
    [shading] shading=cel: FPS: 14157 FrameTime: 0.071 ms
    [bump] bump-render=high-poly: FPS: 11664 FrameTime: 0.086 ms
    [bump] bump-render=normals: FPS: 15074 FrameTime: 0.066 ms
    [bump] bump-render=height: FPS: 14998 FrameTime: 0.067 ms
    libpng warning: iCCP: known incorrect sRGB profile
    [effect2d] kernel=0,1,0;1,-4,1;0,1,0;: FPS: 16919 FrameTime: 0.059 ms
    libpng warning: iCCP: known incorrect sRGB profile
    [effect2d] kernel=1,1,1,1,1;1,1,1,1,1;1,1,1,1,1;: FPS: 16612 FrameTime: 0.060 ms
    [pulsar] light=false:quads=5:texture=false: FPS: 15541 FrameTime: 0.064 ms
    libpng warning: iCCP: known incorrect sRGB profile
    [desktop] blur-radius=5:effect=blur:passes=1:separable=true:windows=4: FPS: 8164 FrameTime: 0.122 ms
    libpng warning: iCCP: known incorrect sRGB profile
    [desktop] effect=shadow:windows=4: FPS: 8348 FrameTime: 0.120 ms
    [buffer] columns=200:interleave=false:update-dispersion=0.9:update-fraction=0.5:update-method=map: FPS: 1189 FrameTime: 0.841 ms
    [buffer] columns=200:interleave=false:update-dispersion=0.9:update-fraction=0.5:update-method=subdata: FPS: 1467 FrameTime: 0.682 ms
    [buffer] columns=200:interleave=true:update-dispersion=0.9:update-fraction=0.5:update-method=map: FPS: 1221 FrameTime: 0.819 ms
    [ideas] speed=duration: FPS: 5648 FrameTime: 0.177 ms
    [jellyfish] <default>: FPS: 13110 FrameTime: 0.076 ms
    [terrain] <default>: FPS: 1939 FrameTime: 0.516 ms
    [shadow] <default>: FPS: 12114 FrameTime: 0.083 ms
    [refract] <default>: FPS: 3845 FrameTime: 0.260 ms
    [conditionals] fragment-steps=0:vertex-steps=0: FPS: 14620 FrameTime: 0.068 ms
    [conditionals] fragment-steps=5:vertex-steps=0: FPS: 15881 FrameTime: 0.063 ms
    [conditionals] fragment-steps=0:vertex-steps=5: FPS: 16657 FrameTime: 0.060 ms
    [function] fragment-complexity=low:fragment-steps=5: FPS: 17256 FrameTime: 0.058 ms
    [function] fragment-complexity=medium:fragment-steps=5: FPS: 17571 FrameTime: 0.057 ms
    [loop] fragment-loop=false:fragment-steps=5:vertex-steps=5: FPS: 17570 FrameTime: 0.057 ms
    [loop] fragment-steps=5:fragment-uniform=false:vertex-steps=5: FPS: 17540 FrameTime: 0.057 ms
    [loop] fragment-steps=5:fragment-uniform=true:vertex-steps=5: FPS: 17667 FrameTime: 0.057 ms
    =======================================================
                                      glmark2 Score: 12379
    =======================================================

If the GPU driver is functional, can pull metrics about your device from the kernel:

    $ sudo cat /sys/kernel/debug/dri/0/amdgpu_pm_info
    Clock Gating Flags Mask: 0x3fbcf
            Graphics Medium Grain Clock Gating: On
            Graphics Medium Grain memory Light Sleep: On
            Graphics Coarse Grain Clock Gating: On
            Graphics Coarse Grain memory Light Sleep: On
            Graphics Coarse Grain Tree Shader Clock Gating: Off
            Graphics Coarse Grain Tree Shader Light Sleep: Off
            Graphics Command Processor Light Sleep: On
            Graphics Run List Controller Light Sleep: On
            Graphics 3D Coarse Grain Clock Gating: Off
            Graphics 3D Coarse Grain memory Light Sleep: Off
            Memory Controller Light Sleep: On
            Memory Controller Medium Grain Clock Gating: On
            System Direct Memory Access Light Sleep: Off
            System Direct Memory Access Medium Grain Clock Gating: On
            Bus Interface Medium Grain Clock Gating: Off
            Bus Interface Light Sleep: On
            Unified Video Decoder Medium Grain Clock Gating: On
            Video Compression Engine Medium Grain Clock Gating: On
            Host Data Path Light Sleep: On
            Host Data Path Medium Grain Clock Gating: On
            Digital Right Management Medium Grain Clock Gating: Off
            Digital Right Management Light Sleep: Off
            Rom Medium Grain Clock Gating: On
            Data Fabric Medium Grain Clock Gating: Off
            Address Translation Hub Medium Grain Clock Gating: Off
            Address Translation Hub Light Sleep: Off

    GFX Clocks and Power:
            300 MHz (MCLK)
            300 MHz (SCLK)
            300 MHz (PSTATE_SCLK)
            300 MHz (PSTATE_MCLK)
            800 mV (VDDGFX)
            7.162 W (average GPU)

    GPU Temperature: 31 C
    GPU Load: 25 %
    MEM Load: 7 %

    UVD: Disabled

    CE: Disabled

## Essential applications

If you've gone down the window manager (i.e. tiler) route, there is literally nothing, its a minimalist wasteland. Here's the programs I use to support my specific workflows, as a software engineer and terminal fanboy.

My 2c consider [suckless](https://suckless.org/) programs, which pair nicely with the minimal arch environment just setup.

- AUR helper: `paru` (install this first)
- Audio: `alsamixer`, `alsa-utils`, `pulseaudio`, `pulseaudio-alsa`, `pulsemixer`
- Bluetooth: `bluez`, `bluez-utils`, `pulseaudio-bluetooth`
- Database: `postgres`
- Dev: `gcc`, `python`, `golang`, `java`
- Documenation: `pandoc`, `texlive-core`, `texlive-bin`, `texlive-latexextra`, `texlive-publishers`, `texlive-fontsexta`, `troff`, `pdflatex`
- DVD/CD burning: `dvd+rw-tools`, `cdrtools`, `lame`
- Games: `steam` (enable multilib pacman repo), `nethack`
- Fonts: `nerd-fonts-fira-code`, `ttf-fira-code`, `ttf-font-awesome`, `ttf-ms-fonts`, `ttf-linux-libertine`, `ttf-dejavu`, `ttf-inconsolata`, `ttf-ubuntu-font-family` (steer clear of noto fonts due to glyph bug with Xft which crashes `st`)
- Font management: `xorg-xfontsel` (GUI for specifying a font in XLFD), `xorg-xfontsel` (list fonts by name in X logical font description aka XLFD format)
- File manager: `nnn`
- Hypervisor (VM's): `vbox`
- Image viewer: `sxiv`
- IRC client: `irssi`
- Mail: `neomutt`, `isync`, `msmtp`, `lynx`
- Music player: `mpd`, `mpc`, `ncmpcpp`
- Networking: `networkmanager`, `wifi-menu`, `dialog`
- Notifications: `dunst`, `dzen2`
- PDF viewer: `mupdf`
- Screenshots: `maim`, `xclip`
- Shells: `dash`, `zsh`
- System monitor: `conky` (handy for piping into `dzen2`) as per my `~/bin/popinfo2` script
- Terminal emulator: `st`
- Text editor: `neovim`, `python-pynvim`
- Video player: `vlc`
- VPN: `openvpn`
- Window manager: `dwm`
- Virtualisation: `libvirt`, `qemu`, `virt-manager`, `dnsmasq`, `iptables`, `ebtables`

## Desktop Environment (DE) vs Window Manager (WM)

In a nutshell a DE (like gnome or kde) is heavy weight includes everything bar the kitchen sink, such as music players, document editors, file managers, status bars, network managers, start menus, etc. They are incredibly bloated, but aimed at novice users that just want their computer "to work". A WM (like dwm or i3) on the other hand is incredibly lean, I mean you don't even get a status bar, but are very customisable and do just what you want and no more. Because of this WM's tend to be allot snappier. I personally prefer using a WM, and more specifically a tiling WM (aka a _tiler_) and highly recommend [dwm](https://dwm.suckless.org/):

> Because dwm is customized through editing its source code [C], it's pointless to make binary packages of it. This keeps its userbase small and elitist. No novices asking stupid questions.

I have started to form some of my own opinions around the use of a tiler:

- Gaps between windows are literally a waste of space. Don't do this.
- Don't bother with lots of the cosmetic ricing hacks out there, its all bloat.
- Toolbars (such as `polybar`) display redundant information at the cost of cognitive overload and wasted screen real-estate. If I want to know the time I look at my watch.

### dwm

I've have recently discovered [suckless](https://suckless.org/), and their [philosophy](https://suckless.org/philosophy/) towards software really resonates strongly with me.

> We are the home of quality software such as dwm, dmenu, st and plenty of other tools, with a focus on simplicity, clarity and frugality. Our philosophy is about keeping things simple, minimal and usable.

`dwm` is their minimal tiling window manager.

> Because dwm is customized through editing its source code, it's pointless to make binary packages of it. This keeps its userbase small and elitist. No novices asking stupid questions.

The configuration of dwm is done by creating a custom `config.h`, by editing the `config.def.h` header, and (re)compiling the source code using the provided makefile.

    pacman -Sy xorg-server xorg-xinit xf86-video-amdgpu libxft libxinerama

Clone the `dwm` Git repo, and my patches:

    git clone https://git.suckless.org/dwm
    git clone https://github.com/bm4cs/dots.git
    cd ~/dotfiles && ./install.sh

Apply [patches](https://dwm.suckless.org/patches/) for specific features wanted. The only patch I apply is [center](https://dwm.suckless.org/patches/center/):

> Add an iscentered rule to automatically center clients on the current monitor.

This lets you define rules in `config.def.h` for certain programs (e.g. pulsemixer) that you'd like to launch center screen, by adding an `iscentered` rule to automatically center clients on the current monitor:

    static const Rule rules[] = {
    	/* xprop(1):
    	 *	WM_CLASS(STRING) = instance, class
    	 *	WM_NAME(STRING) = title
    	 */
    	/* class      instance       title       tags mask     iscentered     isfloating   monitor */
    	{ "Gimp",     NULL,          NULL,       0,            0,             1,           -1 },

To you can see the `WM_CLASS` and `WM_NAME` properties of the X window are used by the rule chain to figure out what rules to apply. To determine these values, use `xprop` which will give you a mouse cursor to select the window of the running program you are interested in, and will dump its property to stdout:

    $ xprop WM_CLASS
    WM_CLASS(STRING) = "st-256color", "st-256color"

    $ xprop WM_CLASS
    WM_CLASS(STRING) = "st-256color", "st-256color"

    $ xprop WM_NAME
    WM_NAME(UTF8_STRING) = "vim"

Build and install:

    make && sudo make install

To autostart `dwm`:

Edit `~/.xinitrc` with following:

    exec dwm

Then `startx`. A black screen desktop should appear. This is good.


## Default applications

Programs that handle arbitrary files (e.g. web browsers, irc clients, file managers) delegate to a general purpose resource handler. _XDG MIME Applications_ is the ubiquitous option here, and is not only an implementation, but a full blown specification.

To check a default program to be used based on MIME type:

    xdg-mime query default text/plain

Or, if unsure of the MIME type, to check a default program based on a sample input file:

    xdg-mime query filetype 2016-01-12-jdbc-overflow.markdown

To set a default handler, the program needs a, the program needs a `.desktop` launcher. First make sure one exists:

    $ locate -i nvim.desktop
    /usr/share/applications/nvim.desktop

Then bind it as the default for a given file (MIME) type:

    xdg-mime default nvim.desktop text/plain

Test it out:

    xdg-open 2018-01-08-pki.markdown

These are stored in `~/.local/mimeapps.list`.

## Ricing

> The term ricing originates from the auto enthusiast community, and was used predominantly as a perjorative to describe people who make modifications to their (usually Japanese) cars that add visual flair, but don't improve performance. In the context of unixporn, it means customizing your desktop to make it look snazzy.

This rice was used on `i3`. While I enjoyed my brief time using this excellent tiler, I have moved to using suckless `dwm`. While these ricing hacks should apply to various window managers and tilers, I havent verified.

### Wallpaper

    pacman -S feh

Add a task runner to `~/.config/i3/config` to always set the wallpaper whenever i3 runs.

    (feh --bg-scale ~/dots/art/quiet-mind-by-alena-aenami.png) & # wallpaper

### Sound

    pacman -S alsa-utils

Can now run `alsamixer` to manage the sound card.

### Load Xresources at startup

Used to customise the appearance of graphical (i.e. X!) apps such as `dwm`, `st` and `urxvt`.

Ensure that `.XResouces` is read in when starting X by placing this in your `~/.xinitrc`:

    xrdb -merge ~/.Xresources &

If you dont have an `~/.Xresources` of your own, checkout my [dots](https://github.com/bm4cs/dots).

Remember to run `xrdb ~/.Xresources` after editing it.

### Making GTK and QT apps pretty

    pacman -S lxappearance gtk-chtheme gtk-engine-murrine gtk-engines gnome-themes-extra qt5ct

Define the following environment variables to override default QT styling:

    export QT_STYLE_OVERRIDE=adwaita
    export QT_QPA_PLATFORMTHEME="qt5ct"
    export QT_AUTO_SCREEN_SCALE_FACTOR=0

### Clock in status bar

Involves setting the 'name' property of the root window using `xsetroot`.

First I like to make a little script I keep in my `~/bin/`, which periodically sets the time:

```bash
#!/bin/sh

print_date(){
	date "+%a %d %b %H:%M"
}

while true
do
	xsetroot -name "$(print_date)"
	sleep 1m
done
```

Then in `~/.xinitrc` its just a matter of backgrounding this script:

    ~/bin/dwmbar &

# Virtualisation

Easy instructions to get QEMU/KVM and virt-manager up and running on Arch.

Source: <https://gist.github.com/diffficult/cb8c385e646466b2a3ff129ddb886185>

1.  Make sure your cpu supports kvm `grep -E "(vmx|svm)" --color=always /proc/cpuinfo`
2.  Make sure VT CPU extension is enabled in BIOS.
3.  User access to `/dev/kvm` so add your account into kvm(78) group with `sudo gpasswd -a USER_NAME kvm`
4.  Loading kernel modules `kvm_intel` or `kvm_amd` depend on your CPU, Add module name in `/etc/modules-load.d/kvm.conf` either `kvm_intel` or `kvm_amd`
5.  Install `qemu`, `virt-manager`, `dnsmasq` and `iptables` with `sudo pacman -S qemu virt-manager dnsmasq iptables ebtables dnsmasq`
6.  Run and enable boot up start `libvirtd` daemon with `systemctl start libvirtd` and `systemctl enable libvirtd`
7.  Use PolicyKit authorization create `/etc/polkit-1/rules.d/50-libvirt.rules` with the example policy below.
8.  You will need to create the libvirt group and add any users you want to have access to **libvirt** to that group with `groupadd libvirt` then `sudo gpasswd -a USER_NAME libvirt`
9.  Check network interface status `sudo virsh net-list --all`. If it is `inactive` start it using `sudo virsh net-start default`
10. Now you can use virt-manager manager your virtual machine.
11. Things to do after installing a Windows VM. Check and install drivers on your guest Windows VM, probably `virtio-win` is a nice place to start.

PolicyKit that allows the `kvm` group to manage libvirt:

```
/* Allow users in kvm group to manage the libvirt
daemon without authentication */
polkit.addRule(function(action, subject) {
    if (action.id == "org.libvirt.unix.manage" &&
        subject.isInGroup("kvm")) {
            return polkit.Result.YES;
    }
});
```

## What if the `default` network interface is not listed

If `virsh net-list` is not listing any network interface just reinitialize it with:

     sudo virsh net-define /usr/share/libvirt/networks/default.xml

Then just `autostart` it like so,

    sudo virsh net-autostart default

## How to extend / increase a Windows Partition on KVM QEMU VM

1.  Shutdown the VM `virsh shutdown hostname`
2.  Increase the qcow2 image. Find the qcow2 file of the VM and take a backup (just in case).

```
cp hostname.qcow2 hostname.qcow2.backup
qemu-img resize hostname.qcow2 +100GB
```

3.  Start the VM `virsh start hostname`
4.  Extend the partition in Window

# Troubleshooting

## Error loading vmlinuz-linux: not found

The kernel image is gone, and there is nothing for GRUB to boot. This happens occassionally when doing a full system update, and a package fails due to a conflict.

1. Boot Arch on USB key.
2. Mount the bricked system volumes into `/mnt`, specifically the `/` and `/boot` mounts, as described above in _Mount partitions_.
3. `arch-chroot /mnt`
4. Install a Linux kernel into `/boot` with `pacman -S linux`

## pacman - Failed to commit transaction (conflicting files)

Likely a program has been installed, not using `pacman`, such as a tarball.

If another package did create the conflicting files, that is a bug and should be logged. Verify this is/isnt the case with `pacman -Qo /path/to/conflicting/file`

Trivial to [resolve](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Pacman). Rename the conflicting file, and reissue package update command. If successfully, blow the renamed remnants away.

    error: failed to commit transaction (conflicting files)
    expressvpn: /usr/share/bash-completion/completions/expressvpn exists in filesystem
    Errors occurred, no packages were upgraded.

## invalid or corrupted package (PGP signature)

On an old thinkpad recently discovered this problem, due to having never enabled NTP. Run `timedatectl`, if it reports no for time synchronisation, this could be your problem. To remedy:

1. `sudo su`
2. `timedatectl set-ntp true`
3. `mv /etc/pacman.d/gnupg /etc/pacman.d/gnupg-orig`
4. `pacman-key --init`
5. `pacman -Sy && pacman-key --populate archlinux`
6. `pacman -S archlinux-keyring`

Kudos to Scimmia and MountainX on the [Arch Forums](https://bbs.archlinux.org/viewtopic.php?id=233710). The best bit, the explanation:

1. You boot the Arch install disk with the wrong date, the keyring is initialised, and master key created.
2. The Arch master keys are imported and locally signed by your local master key, making them trusted.
3. Your clock is fixed. At this point your local master key is considered to be created in the future and can't be used to sign anything.
4. A new Arch master key is added (Bartłomiej's). The update tries to locally sign the key, but it fails because of 3.
5. Packaging keys are trusted if they have 3 or more signatures from trusted master keys. Up until now, they've all had 3 sigs without needing Bartłomiej's. Eli's only had 2 without it.


Recently (2023) do a rebuild of an old laptop, reinitialising the keyring and re-populating made everything work. Suspect that the `base` metapackage wasn't installed with `pacstrap` but I'm sure it was...

```
pacman-key --init
pacman-key --populate archlinux
```

## JetBrains GoLand madness

### Window reparenting madness

If you launch Goland to only find a blank window, this is likely the same problem.

In the launcher script e.g: `~/.local/share/JetBrains/Toolbox/apps/Goland/ch-0/203.5981.98/bin/goland.sh`

Make sure to `export _JWT_AWT_WM_NONREPARENTING=1` someplace prior to the `JAVA_BIN` execution command.

### Incorrect editor warnings and errors

GoLand caches its representation of the golang world. If you've recently upgraded compiler versions or similar, make sure to invalidate the IDE cache in, File | Invalidate Caches

# Conclusion

This is a worth while endevour to take. I now have a very tailored system that works exactly how I want, without any bloat, and its FAST. Finally if interested, all my configuration from `vim` to `st` and `dwm` is in my [dots](https://github.com/bm4cs/dots) repo.

I've have recently discovered [suckless](https://suckless.org/) and their [philosophy](https://suckless.org/philosophy/) towards software really resonates strongly with me.

> We are the home of quality software such as `dwm`, `dmenu`, `st` and plenty of other tools, with a focus on simplicity, clarity and frugality. Our philosophy is about keeping things simple, minimal and usable.
