---
layout: post
title: "LaTeX"
date: "2019-05-26 17:48:10"
comments: false
categories:
- documentation
tags:
- latex
- documentation
---

<span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">L<span style="text-transform: uppercase; font-size: 0.75em; vertical-align: 0.25em; margin-left: -0.36em; margin-right: -0.15em; line-height: 1ex;">a</span>T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span> is a high-quality typesetting system; features are designed for the production of technical and scientific documentation. It's the de-facto standard for the communication and publication of scientific documents, and available as free software. <span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">L<span style="text-transform: uppercase; font-size: 0.75em; vertical-align: 0.25em; margin-left: -0.36em; margin-right: -0.15em; line-height: 1ex;">a</span>T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span> is actually built on the <span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span> typesetting system created by the legendary [Donald Knuth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald_Knuth).

<span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">L<span style="text-transform: uppercase; font-size: 0.75em; vertical-align: 0.25em; margin-left: -0.36em; margin-right: -0.15em; line-height: 1ex;">a</span>T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span> is nothing more than a series of <span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span> macros, providing ready made commands for common formatting and layout needs, such as section headings, footnotes, bibliographies and cross references.


The name <span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">L<span style="text-transform: uppercase; font-size: 0.75em; vertical-align: 0.25em; margin-left: -0.36em; margin-right: -0.15em; line-height: 1ex;">a</span>T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span> is pronounced lah-teck or lay-teck, and NOT lay-tecks. The characters in <span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span>, on which <span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">L<span style="text-transform: uppercase; font-size: 0.75em; vertical-align: 0.25em; margin-left: -0.36em; margin-right: -0.15em; line-height: 1ex;">a</span>T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span> is based, on the greek word τέχνη (skill, art, technique). Creator Donald Knuth promotes a pronunciation of /tɛx/ (tekh) (using a voiceless velar fricative as in Modern Greek, similar to the ch in loch).



# Install base Tex system

*Tex Live* is one great (GPLv2 licenced) way to get up and running with a completely standalone TeX system. In addition to the core TeX compiler, can bundle in optional packages and macros. These really are essential if you want to be productive.

On Arch, you can installed the everything with `sudo pacman -S textlive-most`. For Debian based distros `sudo apt install textlive-full`

Alternatively cherry pick the individual packages (e.g. I went with these on my Arch system):

* `texlive-core` base system and libs
* `texlive-bin` CLI programs and compiler
* `texlive-latexextra` LaTeX macros
* `texlive-publishers`
* `texlive-fontsextra` fonts
* `pdflatex` for rendering LaTeX to PDF



# Pandoc

[Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) is an amazing program (written in haskell) that converts document formats from one format to another. Some examples are Markdown to reveal.js. HTML to docx. In the specific case of writing technical reports, I'm most interesting in going from Markdown to LaTeX.


On Arch, install these packages:

* `pandoc` base Pandoc system
* `pandoc-citeproc` bibliography support
* `pandoc-crossref` cross referencing of figures and tables



# Author paper

Write the paper in plain old markdown. Use YAML frontmatter to specify variables for Pandoc to use in its LaTeX template. By default Pandoc will produce its own template `pandoc -D latex`. Supported front matter options for a LaTeX targetted output format are documented [here](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#variables-for-latex) (along with others). Here's an example from one of my papers:

    ---
    title: "Semantic Similarity in Binaries with BinHunt"
    date: "May 2019"
    author: "Benjamin Simmonds, UNSW Canberra"
    abstract: Extracting meaningful semantic differences between software binaries without source code is difficult. This is a challenging problem due to the overwhelming amount of syntactic noise that small changes can result in at the assembly level.
    ---
    
    # Introduction
    
    Software binaries, or architecture specific compiled programs are often 



# Create bibliography (BibTeX)

If not familiar with BibTeX, don't worry the basics are easy.

> BibTeX is reference management software for formatting lists of references. The BibTeX tool often coupled with the LaTeX document preparation system.

Create a BibTeX file with all the references you consumed to produce your research. I for example always create a file called `paper.bib`, and cite every reference I use in this file. An excerpt from one:


    @misc{tardos2006algorithm,
      title={Algorithm Design},
      author={Tardos, Eva and Kleinberg, Jon},
      year={2006},
      publisher={Reading (MA): Addison-Wesley}
    }
    
    @ONLINE {symbolicexecution2019,
      author = "Schroeder, Brian and Burget, Joel",
      title  = "A gentle introduction to symbolic execution",
      month  = "apr",
      year   = "2019",
      url    = "https://blog.monic.co/a-gentle-introduction-to-symbolic-execution/"
    }
    
    @article{eskandari2012graph,
      title={A graph mining approach for detecting unknown malwares},
      author={Eskandari, Mojtaba and Hashemi, Sattar},
      journal={Journal of Visual Languages \& Computing},
      volume={23},
      number={3},
      pages={154--162},
      year={2012},
      publisher={Elsevier}
    }
    
    @inproceedings{jin2012binary,
      title={Binary function clustering using semantic hashes},
      author={Jin, Wesley and Chaki, Sagar and Cohen, Cory and Gurfinkel, Arie and Havrilla, Jeffrey and Hines, Charles and Narasimhan, Priya},
      booktitle={2012 11th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications},
      volume={1},
      pages={386--391},
      year={2012},
      organization={IEEE}
    }

Don't worry, most academic and journal databases support BibTeX formatting out of the box. Using [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com.au/) for example locate the relevant paper you want to cite, click the *Cite* option and then the *BibTeX* link.

The `pandoc-citeproc` filter automatically creates a *references* section at the end of the document, and will substitute all references in the markdown source in academic citation style. To reference a BibTeX entry in the content of the paper, simply prefix the BibTeX tag with an ampersand `@`, for example:

    The novel concept first introduced (@jin2012binary, P42) blah blah blah

References with BibTeX entry:

    @inproceedings{jin2012binary,
      title={Binary function clustering using semantic hashes},
      author={Jin, Wesley and Chaki, Sagar and Cohen, Cory and Gurfinkel, Arie and Havrilla, Jeffrey and Hines, Charles and Narasimhan, Priya},
      booktitle={2012 11th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications},
      volume={1},
      pages={386--391},
      year={2012},
      organization={IEEE}
    }



# Render the paper as PDF

You could run the following `pandoc` command on the shell. I prefer to use `make`, which will happily take on the tedious task of building the PDF version of your paper. Simply run `make`.

To do this create a new file called `Makefile`, placing it in the same directory as `paper.md` (the Markdown file to be converted into LaTeX by pandoc) and `paper.bib` (a vanilla BibTeX file) files:

    all: clean paper
    
    paper:
    	pandoc -s -F pandoc-crossref -F pandoc-citeproc --bibliography=paper.bib \
    	--variable papersize=a4paper \
    	--variable classoption=twocolumn \
    	-s paper.md -o paper.pdf
    
    tex:
    	pandoc -s -F pandoc-crossref -F pandoc-citeproc --bibliography=paper.bib \
    	--variable papersize=a4paper \
    	-s paper.md -t latex -o paper.tex
    
    clean:
    	rm -f *.pdf *.log *.tex

By default, running `make` will kick off the `all` target, first cleaning up old output files, following up by creating a fresh PDF output. Optionally if you want the raw TeX output, can do so with a `make tex`.


# Use Git

Authoring documents using Markdown and LaTeX is absolutely life changing. You end up with the most beautifully typeset document output known to man, while maintaining the source for the report in a plain text format. Plain text (unlike nasty proprietary binary formats like docx) lends itself to:

* Diffing (with `diff`) and patching (with `patch`)
* Keeping in a version control system (VCS) like Git, to track the when, who, what of all changes.
* Can use your favourite text editor (i.e. Vim)

I personally have a single Git repo for all my papers. In the top level of the repo, create a `.gitignore` based on the useful `TeX.gitignore` template from [github/gitignore](https://github.com/github/gitignore), to prevent generated or temporary files for being commmitted into the repo.

Periodically push the repo to GitHub as a convenient backup and distribution mechanism.



# Resources

[Gist by macogden](https://gist.github.com/maxogden/97190db73ac19fc6c1d9beee1a6e4fc8)

<span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span>

<span class="texhtml" style="font-family: 'CMU Serif', cmr10, LMRoman10-Regular, 'Latin Modern Math', 'Nimbus Roman No9 L', 'Times New Roman', Times, serif;">L<span style="text-transform: uppercase; font-size: 0.75em; vertical-align: 0.25em; margin-left: -0.36em; margin-right: -0.15em; line-height: 1ex;">a</span>T<span style="text-transform: uppercase; vertical-align: -0.5ex; margin-left: -0.1667em; margin-right: -0.125em; line-height: 1ex;">e</span>X</span>


