---
layout: post
title: "Suckless"
date: "2020-04-08 10:54:45"
comments: false
categories:
- linux
tags:
- dwm
- st
- slock
---

The [suckless](https://suckless.org/) project values simplicity, clarity and frugality in software.

> Our philosophy is about keeping things simple, minimal and usable. We believe this should become the mainstream philosophy in the IT sector.

Refreshingly suckless focus on an often ignored segment of users, advanced and experienced computer users.

> In contrast with the usual proprietary software world or many mainstream open source projects that focus more on average and non-technical end users, we think that experienced users are mostly ignored.


As a user of most of their programs including the infamous [dwm](https://dwm.suckless.org/) (a tiling window manager), [dmenu](https://tools.suckless.org/dmenu/) (launcher), [st](https://st.suckless.org/) (terminal emulator) and others [tools](https://tools.suckless.org/), I can attest to benefits of using minimal and efficient software.

> Because dwm is customized through editing its source code [C], it's pointless to make binary packages of it. This keeps its userbase small and elitist. No novices asking stupid questions.




# Patching

Programs are customised by [patching](https://dwm.suckless.org/patches/) the C source code. However, unlike typical open source projects, suckless source code is quite readable and hackable, a by-product of the philosophy.


Download a patch and apply it:

    patch -p1 -i cool-dwm-feature-i-need-20191002-b46028b.diff

The first few patches generally apply cleanly. After that, the base source code gets frankensteined for `patch` to work with. Don't fear, manually applying the patches using your editor is quite enjoyable.


Some suckless conventions:

* User configuration is defined in the `config.def.h` header. Always maintain this file and never `config.h` directly.
* I patch the `clean` target in the `Makefile` to include a `@rm -f config.h`
* When building always do a clean before running install, like this `make clean && sudo make install`
* Don't use too many patches (i.e. stay vanilla as possible)
* Get in the habit of applying the patches, as opposed to forking the git repo. Forking results in an unmaintainable mess that gets out of sync with upstream suckless changes.
* Every so often `git pull` (or re-cloning if your too heavily patched) the latest fixes and enhancements, and re-patching.





# dwm

Tiling window manager.

Patches:

* [centre]() adds the ability to centre floating windows

`config.def.h` mods:

* Change `MODKEY` to super key
* Define the `HYPER` and `MEH` combinations
* Register launcher strings (`const char*`) for each program I want shortcuts for.
* Register the above launcher strings to specific key bindings (e.g. HYPER + I will launch `pulsemixer` in a centered floating window).


# st

Terminal emulator.



# slock

A graphical lock screen.

Patches:

* [messages]() adds text support to lock screen overlay


