content/posts/2020-07-12-8bit.md, before:

---
layout: post
draft: false
title: "8-bit Computer"
slug: "oidc"
date: "2020-07-12 20:08:55"
lastmod: "2021-02-07 22:06:48"
comments: false
categories:
  - cpu
tags:
  - hardware
---

This material is based on the high quality _build your own CPU_ guide by [Ben Eater](https://eater.net/8bit). Ben cites the SAP-1 CPU architecture as the design inspiration for the CPU, which originated from the book [Digital Computer Electonics](https://www.amazon.com.au/Digital-Computer-Electronics-Albert-Malvino/dp/0028005945) by Albert Paul Malvino.

> The SAP (Simple As Possible) computer has been designed for you, the beginner. Its purpose, to introduce the crucial ideas behind a CPUs operation without burying you in unnecessary detail.

- [General Electonics](#general-electonics)
  - [Dirty power](#dirty-power)
  - [Resistors](#resistors)
  - [Capacitors](#capacitors)
  - [D flip flop](#d-flip-flop)
- [The clock](#the-clock)
- [The registers](#the-registers)
- [ALU](#alu)
  - [Design](#design)
  - [Implementation](#implementation)
  - [Representing negative numbers - signing bit, 1's and 2's complement](#representing-negative-numbers---signing-bit-1s-and-2s-complement)
    - [Ones complement](#ones-complement)
    - [Two complement](#two-complement)

# General Electonics

## Dirty power

Using an oscilloscope will observe the transition from low to high is rather dirty. To overcome this, the data sheet recommends dropping in a 0.01uF capacitor between pin 5 and ground. In addition placing a 0.1uF capacitor across the positve and negative power pins. When the transistors state change, they immediately attempt to pull in as much current as they can to drive from low to high. At the nano second scale on the oscilloscope, can see this results in a slight lag in pulling the needed current, and also results in a voltage spike/overshoot. To feed this state transition with the needed current, filling up a capacitor (in this case, a 0.1uF across positve and negative pins) will provide an immediate pool of current for use, resulting in a faster low to high, and consequently less of an overshoot/spike.

## Resistors

Measured in ohms. Resistors commonly come in 4 and 5 band variations. A 4 band simply skips out of the 3rd significant digit.

1. 1st significant digit
1. 2nd significant digit
1. 3rd significant digit
1. multiplier
1. tolerance

## Capacitors

Measured in pico farads.

Ceramic caps, due to tiny print real-estate use a 3 digit numeric code, such as 104. A 1st and 2nd significant digit, followed by a multiplier. Therefore a 104 = 100,000pF = 100nf = 0.1uF

## D flip flop

Has a single data input D, and a clock input. It will store the input state D, at the time of the rising edge of the clock pulse.

![D flip flop schematic](/images/8bit-dflipflop-logic.png)

The timing diagram helps drive this home:

![D flip flop timing diagram](/images/8bit-dflipflop-timing.png)

# The clock

2020-07-12

First up to tackle the clock, the backbone of synchronising all digital operations within the CPU. The classic 555 timer IC has been selected, due to its versatility.

The clock will provide an adjustable speed (1Hz upto 200Hz), and a handy debugging _push button manual mode_ to advance a single clock cycle.

The 555 essentially contain a couple of comparators which feed into an SR latch. The first _trigger_ comparator is set to a high voltage of 1.67v, and the second _threshold_ comparator set to a low voltage of 3.33v. When the 3.3v threshold is hit, a discharge transistor is enabled, which drains the capacitor (external to the 555 IC). This capacitor will continually drain and fill, based on this relationship. The drain and fill (duty cycle) rates of the capacitor can be controlled by resistors.

The timing period in seconds can be calculated as **0.693 (Ra + 2Rb) C**

For example a 555 configured with an **Ra** of 1K ohms, **Rb** of 100K ohms, and a 1uF capacitor:

    0.693 (1000 + 2 * 100000) 0.000001
    0.139293 seconds

555 timer modes:

- _Astable_ generates a constant stream of square waves
- _Monostable_ provides two states, one stable (push button controlled), and one unstable variable stream of square waves
- _Bistable_, aka a flip flop, stable in both states, output high and output low

# The registers

2020-08-22

Registers are how a CPU persists data. Registers are cool, because they can store (latch) and/or output their 8-bits of state conditionally, using the _load_ and _enable_ pins.

Given the SAP-1 supports 8-bits, this CPU will feature 3 8-bit registers A, B and IR. The A and B registers are general purpose. The IR, or instruction register, will keep track of the current instruction being executed.

A first attempt at building a register, one might reach for 8 _D flip flops_ to store the state of each input bit.

This will unconditionally store the state. We still need to figre out a way to only conditionally store the input data (from a common bus backbone) only when the _load_ bit is enabled.

![Register load bit logic](/images/8bit-register-dflipflop-load-logic.png)

To prevent all the registers sourcing and sinking their inputs and outputs onto the common 8-bit bus which interconnects them, there needs to be a way to physically disconnect the 8 input pins and/or the 8 output pins to each register.

This is where **tri-state** logic gates come to the rescue. In tri-state logic, a third NULL state is introduced. Outputs can now be high, low or nothing.

The 74LS245 provides 8 tri-state buffers, that can be enabled or disabled with an overall _enable pin_.

![74KS245 octal bus transceiver](/images/8bit-74LS2245-tri-state-buffer.png)

Here Ben presents an interesting decision point. To either keep using discrete logic gates (hardcore purist) or shortcut to using pre-fabed chips such as the 74LS173, which includes four 1-bit (aka 4-bit) D register including tri-state buffered output!

Fantastic, this provides all the primitive building blocks to conditionally source 8-bits of input from the bus, and to conditionally sink 8-bits of output to the bus.

While its doable to build these registers by hand using primitive logic gates, it would take a serious amount of space and chips. I'm going with the shortcut option, which will use 2 of the 74LS173 so we can store 8 individual bits. A nice design option, Ben suggests hardwiring the tri-state output to true, so we can wire up LED's to always visualise the state within each register. As a result, each LED ouput leg now must be wired through a tri-state buffer, and will use the 74LS245 which provides 8 tri-state buffers in a single chip.

Each of the 3 registers (A, B and IC) will occupy a single breadboard.

The API of each register module can be conceptualised as follows.

Inputs:

- RESET: completely resets the state of the d flip flops.
- NOLOAD: when low, will latch the state of the bus
- DISABLE: when low, will output 8-bit register value to bus
- CLOCK: signals that the register should operate
- BUS: the common 8-bit bus

Outputs:

- BUS: the common 8-bit bus

This may seem odd, as the bus can act as both an input and an output to the register module.

# ALU

The arithmetic and logic unit. Sounds complicated. It's not.

This is the logic that makes it possible to add, substract and multiply binary number representations together. Also it can offer more boolean logic focused operations such as AND, OR, XOR evaluating two binary inputs together, and splitting out the result.

In a nutshell the ALU is what makes it possible to perform computations on binary operands.

## Design

The API of the ALU looks like this.

Inputs:

- A register: 8 bits
- B register: 8 bits
- Subtract mode: 1 bit
- Output enabled (EO): 1 bit

Outputs:

- Bus: 8 bits

## Implementation

Sticking with primative logic chips, Ben suggests:

- Daisy chaining two 74LS283 (4-bit adder) together, so support 8-bit representations. These nifty little chips:
  - A1-4: first 4 bits of A register
  - B1-4: first 4 bits of B register
  - Σ1-4: the addition result
  - C0,C4: carry out, and carry in, to support cascading chips together.
- A 74LS86 (8 XOR gates), to negate the B register only when the _subtract bit_ is set.
- A 74LS245 (tri-state buffers) to conditionally output result to the bus, only if the _output enabled (EO)_ bit is set.

## Representing negative numbers - signing bit, 1's and 2's complement

How does a CPU actually represent numbers.

We feable humans work naturally with base 10, and the CPU like things as base 2.

A first attempt might be to whack a signing bit on the front, to represent if the number is positive or negative.

For example the number 5 on an 4-bit CPU might look like this:

    8  4  2  1
    0  1  0  1

Using the far most left bit as the signing bit, negative 5 would be:

    8  4  2  1
    1  1  0  1

Now the problem. How does doing basic arithmetic like adding play out here?

Adding postive 5 with negative 5:

     0101 +
     1101
     ----
    10010

`10010` becomes `0010` as the left most 5th bit gets truncated using a 4-bit representation.

`0010` is postive 2.

5 - 5 = 2

This is the problem.

Some clever people meditated on this problem and devised an elegant representation called _1's complement_.

### Ones complement

Negative numbers are represented by the inverse of the binary representation of its corresponding positive number.

    1001 (-6)
    1010 (-5)
    1011 (-4)
    1100 (-3)
    1101 (-2)
    1110 (-1)
    1111 (-0)
    0000 (0)
    0001 (1)
    0010 (2)
    0011 (3)
    0100 (4)
    0101 (5)
    0110 (6)

Let's see if adding works better, that using a signing bit.

    0101 (5) +
    1010 (-5)
    ----
    1111 (0)

Nice. Another test:

     0110 (6) +
     1101 (-2)
     ----
    X0011 (3)

Close, just off by one. In practice the truncated 1 could be subtracted from the right-most bit, known as _end around borrow_. This is a complexity when working with ones complement.

Also what's with the -0 too!?

### Two complement

Overcomes the dags of ones complement. The representation is just ones complement without the -0.

    1001 (-7)
    1010 (-6)
    1011 (-5)
    1100 (-4)
    1101 (-3)
    1110 (-2)
    1111 (-1)
    0000 (0)
    0001 (1)
    0010 (2)
    0011 (3)
    0100 (4)
    0101 (5)
    0110 (6)

Factoid: In twos complement when adding an integer with its negative (ex: 5 + -5) each addition operation results in 2 (i.e. two 1 bits added). Hence the name _twos complement_.

One difficulty arises when working with twos complement. Deducing the negative representation of a positive, is no longer simply an invert operation like in ones complement.

Example: given the number 5 `0101`, what is -5 in two complement?

Luckily there is a simple procedure; invert the bits, and add one.

`0101` is 5
`1010` invert each bit (ones complement)
`1011` then add 1 (twos complement)

Commit message:

8-bit CPU ALU notes, and first look into using gentoo

content/posts/2020-07-12-8bit.md, after:

---
layout: post
draft: false
title: "8-bit Computer"
slug: "oidc"
date: "2020-07-12 20:08:55"
lastmod: "2021-02-07 22:06:48"
comments: false
categories:
  - cpu
tags:
  - hardware
---

This material is based on the high quality _build your own CPU_ guide by [Ben Eater](https://eater.net/8bit). Ben cites the SAP-1 CPU architecture as the design inspiration for the CPU, which originated from the book [Digital Computer Electonics](https://www.amazon.com.au/Digital-Computer-Electronics-Albert-Malvino/dp/0028005945) by Albert Paul Malvino.

> The SAP (Simple As Possible) computer has been designed for you, the beginner. Its purpose, to introduce the crucial ideas behind a CPUs operation without burying you in unnecessary detail.

Contents:

- [General Electonics](#general-electonics)
  - [Dirty power](#dirty-power)
  - [Resistors](#resistors)
  - [Capacitors](#capacitors)
  - [D flip flop](#d-flip-flop)
- [The clock](#the-clock)
- [The registers](#the-registers)
- [ALU](#alu)
  - [Design](#design)
  - [Implementation](#implementation)
  - [Representing negative numbers - signing bit, 1's and 2's complement](#representing-negative-numbers---signing-bit-1s-and-2s-complement)
    - [Ones complement](#ones-complement)
    - [Two complement](#two-complement)

# General Electonics

## Dirty power

Using an oscilloscope will observe the transition from low to high is rather dirty. To overcome this, the data sheet recommends dropping in a 0.01uF capacitor between pin 5 and ground. In addition placing a 0.1uF capacitor across the positve and negative power pins. When the transistors state change, they immediately attempt to pull in as much current as they can to drive from low to high. At the nano second scale on the oscilloscope, can see this results in a slight lag in pulling the needed current, and also results in a voltage spike/overshoot. To feed this state transition with the needed current, filling up a capacitor (in this case, a 0.1uF across positve and negative pins) will provide an immediate pool of current for use, resulting in a faster low to high, and consequently less of an overshoot/spike.

## Resistors

Measured in ohms. Resistors commonly come in 4 and 5 band variations. A 4 band simply skips out of the 3rd significant digit.

1. 1st significant digit
1. 2nd significant digit
1. 3rd significant digit
1. multiplier
1. tolerance

## Capacitors

Measured in pico farads.

Ceramic caps, due to tiny print real-estate use a 3 digit numeric code, such as 104. A 1st and 2nd significant digit, followed by a multiplier. Therefore a 104 = 100,000pF = 100nf = 0.1uF

## D flip flop

Has a single data input D, and a clock input. It will store the input state D, at the time of the rising edge of the clock pulse.

![D flip flop schematic](/images/8bit-dflipflop-logic.png)

The timing diagram helps drive this home:

![D flip flop timing diagram](/images/8bit-dflipflop-timing.png)

# The clock

2020-07-12

First up to tackle the clock, the backbone of synchronising all digital operations within the CPU. The classic 555 timer IC has been selected, due to its versatility.

The clock will provide an adjustable speed (1Hz upto 200Hz), and a handy debugging _push button manual mode_ to advance a single clock cycle.

The 555 essentially contain a couple of comparators which feed into an SR latch. The first _trigger_ comparator is set to a high voltage of 1.67v, and the second _threshold_ comparator set to a low voltage of 3.33v. When the 3.3v threshold is hit, a discharge transistor is enabled, which drains the capacitor (external to the 555 IC). This capacitor will continually drain and fill, based on this relationship. The drain and fill (duty cycle) rates of the capacitor can be controlled by resistors.

The timing period in seconds can be calculated as **0.693 (Ra + 2Rb) C**

For example a 555 configured with an **Ra** of 1K ohms, **Rb** of 100K ohms, and a 1uF capacitor:

    0.693 (1000 + 2 * 100000) 0.000001
    0.139293 seconds

555 timer modes:

- _Astable_ generates a constant stream of square waves
- _Monostable_ provides two states, one stable (push button controlled), and one unstable variable stream of square waves
- _Bistable_, aka a flip flop, stable in both states, output high and output low

# The registers

2020-08-22

Registers are how a CPU persists data. Registers are cool, because they can store (latch) and/or output their 8-bits of state conditionally, using the _load_ and _enable_ pins.

Given the SAP-1 supports 8-bits, this CPU will feature 3 8-bit registers A, B and IR. The A and B registers are general purpose. The IR, or instruction register, will keep track of the current instruction being executed.

A first attempt at building a register, one might reach for 8 _D flip flops_ to store the state of each input bit.

This will unconditionally store the state. We still need to figre out a way to only conditionally store the input data (from a common bus backbone) only when the _load_ bit is enabled.

![Register load bit logic](/images/8bit-register-dflipflop-load-logic.png)

To prevent all the registers sourcing and sinking their inputs and outputs onto the common 8-bit bus which interconnects them, there needs to be a way to physically disconnect the 8 input pins and/or the 8 output pins to each register.

This is where **tri-state** logic gates come to the rescue. In tri-state logic, a third NULL state is introduced. Outputs can now be high, low or nothing.

The 74LS245 provides 8 tri-state buffers, that can be enabled or disabled with an overall _enable pin_.

![74KS245 octal bus transceiver](/images/8bit-74LS2245-tri-state-buffer.png)

Here Ben presents an interesting decision point. To either keep using discrete logic gates (hardcore purist) or shortcut to using pre-fabed chips such as the 74LS173, which includes four 1-bit (aka 4-bit) D register including tri-state buffered output!

Fantastic, this provides all the primitive building blocks to conditionally source 8-bits of input from the bus, and to conditionally sink 8-bits of output to the bus.

While its doable to build these registers by hand using primitive logic gates, it would take a serious amount of space and chips. I'm going with the shortcut option, which will use 2 of the 74LS173 so we can store 8 individual bits. A nice design option, Ben suggests hardwiring the tri-state output to true, so we can wire up LED's to always visualise the state within each register. As a result, each LED ouput leg now must be wired through a tri-state buffer, and will use the 74LS245 which provides 8 tri-state buffers in a single chip.

Each of the 3 registers (A, B and IC) will occupy a single breadboard.

The API of each register module can be conceptualised as follows.

Inputs:

- RESET: completely resets the state of the d flip flops.
- NOLOAD: when low, will latch the state of the bus
- DISABLE: when low, will output 8-bit register value to bus
- CLOCK: signals that the register should operate
- BUS: the common 8-bit bus

Outputs:

- BUS: the common 8-bit bus

This may seem odd, as the bus can act as both an input and an output to the register module.

# ALU

The arithmetic and logic unit. This is the logic that makes it possible to add, substract and multiply binary number representations together. It can additionally offer boolean logic operations such as AND, OR, XOR and so on. Evaluating two binary inputs together, and spitting out the result.

In a nutshell the ALU is what makes it possible to perform computations on binary operands.

## Design

The API of the SAP ALU looks like this.

Inputs:

- A register: 8 bits
- B register: 8 bits
- Subtract mode: 1 bit
- Output enabled (EO): 1 bit

Outputs:

- Bus: 8 bits

## Implementation

Sticking with primative logic chips, Ben suggests:

- Daisy chaining two 74LS283 (4-bit adder) together, to support 8-bit representations. Interface of nifty little 16-pin chips:
  - A1-4: first 4 bits of A register
  - B1-4: first 4 bits of B register
  - Σ1-4: the addition result
  - C0,C4: carry out, and carry in, to support cascading chips together.
- A 74LS86 (8 XOR gates), to negate the B register only when the _subtract bit_ is set.
- A 74LS245 (tri-state buffers) to conditionally output result to the bus, only if the _output enabled (EO)_ bit is set.

## Representing negative numbers - signing bit, 1's and 2's complement

How does a CPU actually represent numbers.

We feable humans work naturally with base 10, and the CPU like things as base 2.

A first attempt might be to whack a signing bit on the front, to represent if the number is positive or negative.

For example the number 5 on an 4-bit CPU might look like this:

    8  4  2  1
    0  1  0  1

Using the far most left bit as the signing bit, negative 5 would be:

    8  4  2  1
    1  1  0  1

Now the problem. How does doing basic arithmetic like adding play out here?

Adding postive 5 with negative 5:

     0101 +
     1101
     ----
    10010

`10010` becomes `0010` as the left most 5th bit gets truncated in a 4-bit representation.

`0010` is postive 2.

5 - 5 = 2

This is the problem.

Some clever people meditated on this problem and devised an elegant representation called _1's complement_.

### Ones complement

Negative numbers are represented by the inverse of the binary representation of its corresponding positive number.

    1001 (-6)
    1010 (-5)
    1011 (-4)
    1100 (-3)
    1101 (-2)
    1110 (-1)
    1111 (-0)
    0000 (0)
    0001 (1)
    0010 (2)
    0011 (3)
    0100 (4)
    0101 (5)
    0110 (6)

Let's see if adding works better, that using a signing bit.

    0101 (5) +
    1010 (-5)
    ----
    1111 (0)

Nice. Another test:

     0110 (6) +
     1101 (-2)
     ----
    X0011 (3)

Close, just off by one. In practice the truncated 1 could be subtracted from the right-most bit, known as _end around borrow_. This is a complexity when working with ones complement.

Also what's with the -0 too!?

### Two complement

Overcomes the dags of ones complement. The representation is just ones complement without the -0.

    1001 (-7)
    1010 (-6)
    1011 (-5)
    1100 (-4)
    1101 (-3)
    1110 (-2)
    1111 (-1)
    0000 (0)
    0001 (1)
    0010 (2)
    0011 (3)
    0100 (4)
    0101 (5)
    0110 (6)

Factoid: In twos complement when adding an integer with its negative (ex: 5 + -5) each addition operation results in 2 (i.e. two 1 bits added). Hence the name _twos complement_.

One difficulty arises when working with twos complement. Deducing the negative representation of a positive, is no longer simply an invert operation like in ones complement.

Example: given the number 5 `0101`, what is -5 in two complement?

Luckily there is a simple procedure; invert the bits, and add one.

`0101` is 5
`1010` invert each bit (ones complement)
`1011` then add 1 (twos complement)
