---
layout: post
title: "Witcher 3"
draft: true
slug: "witcher"
date: "2020-12-27 11:35:30"
lastmod: "2020-12-27 11:35:31"
comments: false
categories:
    - games
tags:
    - witcher
---

Amazing open world game by Polish developer CD Project Red.

My desk was piling up with post-it notes everywhere, migrating them here instead.

# Character build

As Geralt gains ability points by leveling up and discovering _places of power_, can spend these points on abilities.

A skill is unlocked across one of four trees; combat, signs, alchemy or general.

Once unlocked, the skill needs to be applied on the diagram to the right, in one of 12 ability slots, or 4 mutagen slots.

These slots can be reassigned, which requires careful management depending on each challenge faced.

Mutagens (once unlocked) will increase power levels exponentially, boosting vitality, attack power, and intensity depending on mutagen color.

Its possible to re-spec your build completely, by acquiring _Potion of Clearance_ (costs 1,000 crowns).

## All rounder

[All rounder](https://www.pushsquare.com/news/2020/01/guide_the_best_character_builds_for_geralt_in_the_witcher_3_on_ps4#all-rounder)

1.  Muscle memory (combat): fast attacks
2.  Heightened tolerance (alchemy)
3.  Acquired tolerance (alchemy)
4.  Delusion (signs axii): Axii conversation bonus
5.  Survival instinct (general)
6.  Frenzy (alchemy): pairs with heightened tolerance, help survive when things get crazy
7.  Cat skills
8.  Melt armor (signs igni): weakens armor of enemy, strong when paired with fast attack
9.  Strength training (combat): strong attacks
10. Sun and stars (general)
11. Resolve: each blow generates Adrenaline, increasing weapon damage
12. Mutated skin: take less damage based on adrenaline points

# Maps

Many available, from mobile apps to web apps.

-   [IGN Witcher 3 Maps](https://www.ign.com/wikis/the-witcher-3-wild-hunt/map#Witcher_3_Maps_List)

# Gwent

The infamous game within a game. In itself is a fun card game to play.

-   `x` use special ability

# Places

-   Vizima: home of royal palace
-   Vengerberg: home of Yenifer
-   Novigrad: elven
-   Velen:
-   White orchard:

# Console commands and cheats

## Enable the console

1. Right-click The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt in your Steam Library, and click Manage -> Browse Local Files, which will open up Windows Explorer to that same folder.
2. From here, navigate to bin -> config -> base, and open up the general.ini file with Notepad++ or Notepad.
3. On a new line at the bottom of the file, type “DBGConsoleOn=true” without the quote marks.
4. Save and close the file, then run The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt.
5. Once in-game, you can open and close the console by pressing either @ or # or F2.

Useful commands:

-   `cleardevelop` resets character
-   `setlevel(100)`
-   `addskillpoints(30)`
-   `enablemutations(1)`
-   `additem('Greater mutagen red', 30)`
-   `additem('Greater mutagen green', 30)`
-   `additem('Greater mutagen blue', 30)`


[The Witcher 3 console commands list](https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2020/02/25/the-witcher-3-console-commands-cheats-a-definitive-guide/)

# Tips

-   Loot everything
-   Choose Axii dialogues to gain most XP
-   Find enermy that respawns after you meditate, kill the monster, meditate for 1 hour, rinse and repeat.
-   Three currencies are available, the most common being _crowns_, but also _orens_ and _florens_. The later can't be used early in the game, and get stocked in inventory. Exchange them for _crowns_ with Vimme Vivaldi in Novigrad. You will find him in the southwest corner of the Hierarch Square (M6,5 in our world atlas), not far from Triss Merigold house.
-   Sell honeycombs to herbalist
-   Gain at least 18 XP before taking on Novigrad.
-   Get good at Axii
