---
layout: post
title: "Debian install notes"
draft: false
slug: "debian"
date: "2021-07-11 11:55:08"
lastmod: "2022-03-26 18:22:19+11:00"
comments: false
categories:
    - linux
tags:
    - debian
---

I'm moving lots of my machines back to Debian in the yearning for rock solid stability and a complete distribution that just works. Debian was the first GNU/Linux I ever used as a teenager back in late 90s and I've fond memories of it.

Starting with the official [amd64 install guide](https://www.debian.org/releases/stable/amd64/).

# Preparation

## Make USB key

I quickly [discovered](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/458038/load-missing-firmware-from-removable-media-debian) I want the [image](https://cdimage.debian.org/cdimage/unofficial/non-free/cd-including-firmware/) that includes proprietary firmware, so I can get my (nasty) wifi card working as quickly as possible.

Conveniently Debian images can now be written directly to the USB device:

```
# cp debian.iso /dev/sdX
# sync
```

This is a neat technique that replaces the virtual device `/dev/sdX` with the iso file. The magic here is `sync`, which forces changed blocks on the virtual device to be synchronised with the physical device.

# Installation

The installer is a well oiled machine. Unlike Arch (which I adore) building Debian boxes feels just trivial.

Things I like to do:

## For a desktop

- Go one single LVM-less giant partition.
- Only install the base X windows workload (i.e., none of the GNOME, KDE, LXDE bloat)
- This gives my custom `dwm` build a better chances of compiling and installing

## For a server

- Use LVM and LUKS for my partitions; as this gives me flexibility down the road to shuffle physical and logical volumes around.

# Post boot

## Networking

### Wi-Fi

```
vi /etc/network/interfaces
```

Add the following (amend for your specific interface):

```
allow-hotplug wlp3s0
iface wlp3s0 inet dhcp
    wpa-ssid norm
    wpa-psk PUT_PASSWORD_HERE
```

Bring up the interface with `ifup wlp3s0`

### Wired Ethernet

I recommend using `network-manager` (`nmcli` is the frontend) to manage networks. Install it from the install media (luckily its packed on DVD 1):

```shell
# apt install network-manager
```

Ensure that any existing entries for your ethernet device (e.g., `enp0s31f6`) are commented out in `/etc/network/interfaces`, as this will prevent `network-manager` from managing the device.

A sure sign of this, you'll get the following error when you try to bring the connection up with `nmcli`:

> Error: Connection activation failed: No suitable device found for this connection (device lo not available because device is strictly unmanaged).

Edit `/etc/apt/sources.list` and comment out the `cdrom` sourced entries.

Install some essentials, to persist network configuration:

```
apt update
apt install network-manager
apt install git
```

## sudo

Add users to `sudo` group, and register the group in `sudoers`:

```
usermod -aG sudo ben
visudo
```

## Install packages

I've created a list of essential Debian packages I use for desktop and server workloads.

To get it clone `dots` as bare repo (i.e., without `.git`):

```
git clone --bare git@github.com:bm4cs/dots-home.git $HOME/.dots
alias dots='/usr/bin/git --git-dir=$HOME/.dots/ --work-tree=$HOME'
dots checkout
dots config --local status.showUntrackedFiles no
```

Hack up `~/scripts/debian/software.txt` as needed.

Then run `./scripts/debian/install-software.sh`
