---
layout: post
title: "Gentoo Linux"
draft: false
slug: "gentoo"
date: "2021-02-22 21:29:55"
lastmod: "2021-05-24 21:13:08"
comments: false
categories:
    - linux
tags:
    - gentoo
---

The next step in my minimalist computing journey.

Enter Gentoo, my first source based GNU/Linux distro. Pre-packaged binaries, which is the approach most other (binary based) distros take, must often cater for the lowest common denominator to ensure packages can run on lots of differing setups out in the wild. On a source based distro, I can articulate my specific needs (USE flags on Gentoo) to finely tune the binaries to my system. For example, as I plan to steer clear of software like systemd, kde and gnome, I can ensure support for these packages is NOT built into other program binaries I build for my system.

This is a big win for performance and security.

Read the [Gentoo AMD64 Handbook](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64).

Below are my notes after walking through the handbook.

<!-- vim-markdown-toc GFM -->

* [Preparation stage](#preparation-stage)
    * [Make LiveUSB key](#make-liveusb-key)
    * [Wifi](#wifi)
    * [Partition disk](#partition-disk)
    * [Format partitions](#format-partitions)
    * [Time](#time)
    * [Stage 3 tarball](#stage-3-tarball)
        * [Stage tarball wtf?](#stage-tarball-wtf)
    * [Emerge compile options](#emerge-compile-options)
    * [Mirrors](#mirrors)
    * [DNS](#dns)
    * [Bind mount pseudo-filesystems](#bind-mount-pseudo-filesystems)
    * [chroot](#chroot)
    * [Update the ebuild repository](#update-the-ebuild-repository)
    * [The profile](#the-profile)
    * [Update the @world set](#update-the-world-set)
    * [Timezone](#timezone)
    * [Locale](#locale)
* [Making a kernel](#making-a-kernel)
    * [menuconfig](#menuconfig)
    * [Building the kernel](#building-the-kernel)
    * [Building an initramfs](#building-an-initramfs)
    * [Install firmware](#install-firmware)
    * [Setup ESP](#setup-esp)
* [Configure the system](#configure-the-system)
    * [fstab](#fstab)
    * [Networking](#networking)
        * [Hostname](#hostname)
        * [Network setup](#network-setup)
            * [Troubleshooting tips](#troubleshooting-tips)
    * [Set root password](#set-root-password)
    * [Init (OpenRC) configuration](#init-openrc-configuration)
    * [Hardware clock](#hardware-clock)
* [Install system tools](#install-system-tools)
    * [System logger](#system-logger)
    * [Cron daemon](#cron-daemon)
    * [File indexing](#file-indexing)
    * [SSH](#ssh)
    * [Filesystem tools](#filesystem-tools)
    * [Networking tools](#networking-tools)
        * [DHCP client](#dhcp-client)
        * [Wireless tools](#wireless-tools)
* [Boot loader](#boot-loader)
* [Post boot](#post-boot)
    * [Add regular user](#add-regular-user)
    * [sudo](#sudo)
    * [Cleanup stage 3 tarballs](#cleanup-stage-3-tarballs)
    * [Install userspace progs](#install-userspace-progs)
        * [Non root Xorg](#non-root-xorg)
        * [libvirt](#libvirt)
* [Useful](#useful)
    * [Portage](#portage)
        * [Overlays](#overlays)
    * [OpenRC cheatsheet](#openrc-cheatsheet)
    * [Bare git repo](#bare-git-repo)
    * [USE flags](#use-flags)
        * [CPU_FLAGS_X86](#cpu_flags_x86)
    * [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
        * [Firefox and libaom.so build woes](#firefox-and-libaomso-build-woes)
    * [libvirtd: Unable to create bridge virbr0: Package not installed](#libvirtd-unable-to-create-bridge-virbr0-package-not-installed)

<!-- vim-markdown-toc -->

# Preparation stage

## Make LiveUSB key

Download the latest iso, and use the [gentoo-usb.sh](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/LiveUSB/Guide) script provided.

Boot the system.

## Wifi

Now in the running LiveUSB environment, setup temporarily configured wifi using `wpa_supplicant` like so:

```
wpa_supplicant -B -i $INTERFACE -c <(wpa_passphrase $SSID $PSK)
dhcpcd $INTERFACE
```

Don't waste time with `iw`, which doesnt support WPA/WPA2.

## Partition disk

I'm installing on my new system which is UEFI (not BIOS) based and has an NVME drive.

Aiming for 4 partitions:

-   `/dev/nvme0n1p1`: 2MiB for GRUB bootloader
-   `/dev/nvme0n1p2`: 128MiB for ESP (EFI) boot partition (FAT32)
-   `/dev/nvme0n1p3`: 18000MiB for swap
-   `/dev/nvme0n1p4`: Rest of the disk for `/`

Hence I'll be making a small FAT32 based ESP (EFI System Partition) partition, done with `set 2 boot on`.

I decided on 18000MiB of swap given the system has 16GB of RAM (i.e. RAM size + 2GiB).

```
parted -a optimal /dev/nmve0n1
(parted) mklabel gpt
(parted) unit mib
(parted) mkpart primary 1 3
(parted) name 1 grub
(parted) set 1 bios_grub on
(parted) mkpart primary 3 131
(parted) name 2 boot
(parted) set 2 boot on
(parted) mkpart primary 131 18131
(parted) name 3 swap
(parted) mkpart primary 18131 -1
(parted) name 4 rootfs
```

## Format partitions

Nothing fancy here, fat32 for the ESP, and ext4 for `/`.

```
mkfs.vfat /dev/nvme0n1p2
mkfs.ext4 /dev/nvme0n1p4
mkswap /dev/nvme0n1p3
swapon /dev/nvme0n1p3
mkdir -p /mnt/gentoo
mount /dev/nvme0n1p4 /mnt/gentoo
mount /dev/nvme0n1p2 /mnt/gentoo/boot
```

## Time

To keep various underlying crypto (GPG, TLS) happy, time sync your clock before proceeding.

```
ntpd -q -g
```

## Stage 3 tarball

### Stage tarball wtf?

A stage tarball is just an archive containing a minimal environment.

> A stage 3 tarball provides an almost-complete and almost-functional system (the most important parts still missing are a kernel and a bootloader).

There are a number of stages to choose from, some key upfront design decisions you'll need to make:

-   init system: openrc or systemd
-   lib bitness: multilib (32 and 64) or pure 64 (no multilib)
-   hardened for a lean

Using the `links` ncurses based terminal web browser, head to [https://gentoo.org/downloads/mirrors/]()

I used the aarnet mirror to download the latest openrc based multilib stage3 `stage3-amd64-20210310T214503Z.tar.xz` (about 200Mb), straight to `/mnt/gentoo/` which should be mounted to the targeted primary `/` partition.

Download the `stage3-amd64-20210310T214503Z.tar.xz.DIGESTS.xz` too.

Validate the checksum, the following should get a match:

```
grep $(sha512sum stage3-amd64-20210310T214503Z.tar.xz) stage3-amd64-20210310T214503Z.tar.xz.DIGESTS.xz --color
```

If checksum good, unpack it (`xattrs-include` preserves extended file attributes, and `numeric-owner` preserves uid/gid):

```
tar xpvf stage3-amd64-20210310T214503Z.tar.xz --xattrs-include='*.*' --numeric-owner
```

Some interesting `tar` options being used here:

-   `p` preserves file permissions
-   `xattrs-include` preserve extended attributes
-   `numeric-owner` preserve uid and gid, regardless is they exist in the `/etc/passwd` of the host

## Emerge compile options

The fun bit, tuning Portage, the source based package manager Gentoo officially uses.

Some homework:

-   Read up on [GCC optimisation](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/GCC_optimization) and various compiler and ISA flags you should pass to GCC, to squeeze the most out of your binaries
-   Read up on [MAKEOPTS](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/MAKEOPTS)
-   Read up on Portage [FEATURES](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/FEATURES) particularly `ccache`
-   Read up on [EMERGE_DEFAULT_OPTS](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/EMERGE_DEFAULT_OPTS)
-   Read up on your CPU. I'm running an AMD Ryzen 5600x, the [Gentoo Ryzen wiki page](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Ryzen) and the [GCC handbook](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/x86-Options.html) indicates the `-march` option should be set to `znver3` or `native` for GCC to auto-detect.

When `MAKEOPTS="-jN"` is used with `EMERGE_DEFAULT_OPTS="--jobs K --load-average X.Y"` the number of possible tasks created would be up to `N*K`. Therefore, both variables need to be set with each other in mind as they create up to K jobs each with up to N tasks.

The load average value is the same as displayed by top or uptime, and for an N-core system, a load average of N.0 would be a 100% load. Another rule of thumb here is to set `X.Y=N*0.9` which will limit the load to 90%, thus maintaining responsiveness.

Given my zen 3 ryzen has 12 threads, are going with `N` of 6, `K` of 3, giving a total possible of tasks `N*K` of 18, and a load cap of `12*0.9` = `10.8` which I rounded down to `10`

-   set `N` to 6 with a `MAKEOPTS` of `-j4`
-   set `K` to 3 with a `EMERGE_DEFAULT_OPTS` of `--jobs=3`
-   set `X.Y` to 8 with a `EMERGE_DEFAULT_OPTS` `--load-average=10` and a `MAKEOPTS` of `-l10`

```
vi /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/make.conf
```

## Mirrors

```
mirrorselect -i -o >> /mnt/gentoo/etc/portage/make.conf
```

## DNS

Create `/etc/resolv.conf` and define a `nameserver` entry.

## Bind mount pseudo-filesystems

```
mount --types proc /proc /mnt/gentoo/proc
mount --rbind /sys /mnt/gentoo/sys
mount --rbind /dev /mnt/gentoo/dev
```

## chroot

```
chroot /mnt/gentoo /bin/bash
source /etc/profile
export PS1="(chroot) ${PS1}"
```

## Update the ebuild repository

This snapshot contains a collection of files that informs Portage about available software titles (for installation), which profiles the system administrator can select, package or profile specific news items.

```
emerge-webrsync
emerge --sync
```

## The profile

A key decision point. This profile can affect defaults in _USE_, _CFLAGS_ and other system level variables. It also locks the systems to a certain subset of package versions.

The default is multilib and openrc based, so I'm good to go. Use `eselect profile set n` to change the profile.

```
eselect profile list
```

## Update the @world set

```
emerge --ask --verbose --update --deep --newuse @world
```

## Timezone

```
echo "Australia/Canberra" > /etc/timezone
emerge --config sys-libs/timezone-data
```

## Locale

```
tee /etc/locale-gen <<EOF
en_US ISO-8859-1
en_US.UTF-8 UTF-8
EOF

locale-gen
```

Now to select system wide locale setting using `eselect`:

```
eselect locale list
eselect locale set 6
```

Reload with locale and timezone preferences:

```
env-update && source /etc/profile && export PS1="(chroot) ${PS1}"
```

# Making a kernel

Gentoo provides a number of possible [kernel sources](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Kernel/Overview), with `sys-kernel/gentoo-sources` being a popular option.

Installing it will place the latest supported kernel sources in `/usr/src/` and symlink it to `/usr/src/linux`:

```
emerge -q sys-kernel/gentoo-sources genkernel
emerge --ask sys-apps/pciutils
```

`genkernel` can automatically make a generic kernel, however on gentoo that kind of defeats the purpose. `genkernel` is still useful when crafting a custom kernel, in particular for making an `initramfs`.

Before customising a kernel, its important to get a solid understanding of the machine your targetting; two tools useful in this endevour are `lsmod` and `lspci`. To get the later need to install `pciutils`;

```
emerge -q sys-apps/pciutils
emerge -q app-arch/lzop app-arch/lz4
lspci > ~/lspci.txt
lsmod > ~/lsmod.txt
```

## menuconfig

Time to get to work. The kernel team provides an ncurses TUI interface for going through the various options:

```
cd /usr/src/linux
make menuconfig
```

Read up on the [Gentoo Kernel Configuration Guide](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Kernel/Gentoo_Kernel_Configuration_Guide).

Topics specific to my computer:

-   [Ryzen](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Ryzen#Kernel)
-   [NVMe](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/NVMe)
-   [EFI](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/EFI_System_Partition)
-   [AMDGPU](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/AMDGPU#Kernel)
-   [List of AMD graphics processing units](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_AMD_graphics_processing_units)
-   [MSI B550-A PRO Motherboard details](https://www.msi.com/Motherboard/B550-A-PRO/Specification)
-   [VPN](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/OpenVPN#Kernel)
-   [QEMU](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/QEMU) for virtualisation
-   [Docker](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Docker) for containers

I worked through the various kernel sections in the above, including qualcomm PCIe wifi card, and integrated realtek 8169 ethernet adapter.

Finally to make sure my specific hardware was baked in, I worked through the `lsmod` and `lspci` dumps I made from the LiveCD environment.

_AMDGPU update 2021-04-03_: Somehow I missed the firmware section of the AMDGPU guide above, which hung my first boot.

After emerging `sys-kernel/linux-firmware` which populates `/lib/firmware/` with a stack of firmware blobs, including a subdirectory `amdgpu`.

Due to the GPU crisis of 2021 (its basically impossible to purchase a modern GPU right now) am running my 2016 Radeon RX480.

This runs the Arctic Islands chipset, specifically POLARIS10. The following firmware blobs need to be registered into the _custom kernel firmware loader_, under generic options in `make menuconfig`:

```
amdgpu/polaris10_{ce,ce_2,k_smc,k2_smc,k_mc,mc,me,me_2,mec2,mec2_2,mec,mec_2,pfp,pfp_2,rlc,sdma1,sdma,smc,smc_sk,uvd,vce}.bin
```

## Building the kernel

```
emerge app-arch/lz4
make -j8 && make -j8 modules_install
make install
```

## Building an initramfs

```
emerge --ask sys-kernel/genkernel
genkernel --install --kernel-config=/usr/src/linux/.config initramfs
```

WWA: built kernel and initramfs, contine with kernel modules section in https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Kernel#Kernel_modules

## Install firmware

Most firmware is housed in `sys-kernel/linux-firmware`.

```
emerge -a sys-kernel/linux-firmware
```

## Setup ESP

Ensure the ESP (EFI system partition) is mounted at `/boot` within the `chroot` environment:

```
mount /dev/nvme0n1p2 /mnt/gentoo/boot
```

Move kernel image to the correct place and set a `.efi` suffix:

```
mkdir -p /boot/EFI/Gentoo
cp /boot/vmlinuz-5.11.7-gentoo-r1 /boot/EFI/Gentoo/vmlinuz-5.11.7-gentoo-r1.efi
```

# Configure the system

## fstab

Having `vim` at this point would be incredibly useful. Dump the UUID of block devices with `blkid` in one buffer (or tab), and editing `/etc/fstab` in another.

```
emerge -a app-editors/neovim
nvim /etc/fstab
```

Once in neovim, create a new tab, dump the output of `blkid` into it, yanking the UUID of the block devices needed, grafting them into `/etc/fstab`:

```
:tabnew
:r !blkid
:tabp
:tabn
```

## Networking

### Hostname

```
nvim /etc/conf.d/hostname
```

### Network setup

Gentoo, by default, uses [Netifrc](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Netifrc) as its default network manager. Under `netifrc`, config is defined in `/etc/conf.d/net`.

`ip a` to get device name of the network interface you plan on using.

```
emerge -a --no-replace net-misc/netifrc
nvim /etc/config.d/net
```

In neovim, I like to dump the output of `ip a` into the buffer with a `:r !ip a`, delete all text excluding the name of the network interface you want to configure, in my case `wlp40s0`.

To setup DHCP on the interface, and the `wpa_supplicant` layer to perform WPA/WPA2 authentication on top of the interface:

```
modules="wpa_supplicant"
config_wlp40s0="dhcp"
```

Auto start the network interface:

```
cd /etc/init.d
ln -s net.lo net.wlp40s0
rc-update add net.wlp40s0 default
```

Add `dhcpcd` to default runlevel, don't add wpa_supplicant to any runlevel.

```
rc-update add dhcpcd default
rc-update del wpa_supplicant default
```

Create `/etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf` as follows:

```
ctrl_interface=/var/run/wpa_supplicant
ctrl_interface_group=0
ap_scan=1
fast_reauth=1

network={
    ssid="hotspot"
    psk="weakpassword"
    scan_ssid=1
    key_mgmt=WPA-PSK
    priority=5
}
```

Tip: For a full blown configuration example, unpack the template with `bzless /usr/share/doc/${P}/wpa_supplicant.conf.bz2 > /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf`

Finally edit `/etc/conf.d/wpa_supplicant`:

```
wpa_supplicant_args="-B -M -c/etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf"
```

With the interface setup:

```
rc-service net.wlp40s0 start
rc-service net.wlp40s0 stop
```

#### Troubleshooting tips

Run `wpa_supplicant` interactive (not as a daemon). I idiotically set `ap_scan=0` (great time waster). Also forget `scan_ssid=1` to force scan for hidden ssid.

```
wpa_supplicant -i wlp40s0 -c /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf -dd
```

## Set root password

```
passwd
```

## Init (OpenRC) configuration

Gentoo by default uses OpenRC as its init, which uses `/etc/rc.conf` as its config file.

## Hardware clock

Check your hardware clock using `hwclock --verbose`. Mine was in local time.

```
nvim /etc/conf.d/hwclock
```

Set `clock="local"`

# Install system tools

## System logger

Gentoo is not opinionated; `sysklogd`, `rsyslog`, `syslog-ng` and `metalog` are all supported.

emerge one, and add it to the default runlevel (so it auto boots).

```
emerge -a app-admin/syslog-ng
rc-update add syslog-ng default
```

`syslog-ng` does NOT include log rotate functionality.

```
emerge -a app-admin/logrotate
```

## Cron daemon

Like syslog, many [crons](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Cron#Which_cron_is_right_for_the_job.3F) to choose from; such as `cronie`, `dcron`, `fcron` and `anacron`.

```
emerge -a sys-process/cronie
rc-update add cronie default
```

## File indexing

File system indexer to provide fast lookups.

```
emerge -a sys-apps/mlocate
```

## SSH

If you want to enable remote access, tell OpenRC to bootstrap it as part of default runlevel. OpenSSH is already bundled in stage 3 tarball.

Personally, a NO for me on this particular box.

```
rc-update add sshd default
```

## Filesystem tools

Depending on the file system you're running. I'm going conservative with this box and sticking with good old `ext4`.

```
emerge -a sys-fs/e2fsprogs
```

## Networking tools

### DHCP client

```
emerge -a net-misc/dhcpcd
```

### Wireless tools

Install `iw` for WEP networks, and general useful scanning abilities. Not for me, in this case.

Install `wpa_supplicant` for WPA or WPA2 networks.

```
emerge -a net-wireless/wpa_supplicant
```

# Boot loader

This hardware is a recent 2021 ryzen build, is UEFI based, aiming to use [GRUB2](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/GRUB2) as the bootloader.

First make sure `GRUB_PLATFORMS="efi-x64"` is defined in `/etc/portage/make.conf`, before proceeding.

```
emerge -a sys-boot/grub:2
```

Next, make sure that the ESP `vfat` partition has been mounted to the chroot environment as `/boot`. If not:

```
mount /dev/nvme0n1p2 /mnt/gentoo/boot
```

Next install the GRUB boot loader:

```
grub-install --target=x86_64-efi --efi-directory=/boot
```

This failed for me, due to a missing perl module: _Can't locate Locale/gettext.pm_

Recommendation was to run `perlcleaner --all`, which added missing modules.

Finally generate a GRUB config, which will probe the `/boot` for available kernel images, initramfs and UEFI support.

```
grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg
```

Next, the ultimate test, `reboot` to take your new kernel for a test drive.

# Post boot

## Add regular user

```
useradd -m -G users,wheel,audio,usb,video,portage -s /bin/bash ben
passwd ben
```

## sudo

```
emerge app-admin/sudo
chmod u+w /etc/sudoers
nvim /etc/sudoers
```

Uncomment the line that allows the wheel group to execute any command, after root password is provided.

```
chmod u-w /etc/sudoers
```

## Cleanup stage 3 tarballs

```
rm /stage3*tar.*
```

## Install userspace progs

### Non root Xorg

Its bad practice to run X as root - many eye opening CVE write-ups. Luckily there is a [guide](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Non_root_Xorg) that walks through setting this up on gentoo, in a nutshell:

-   ensure the `elogind` global USE flag is specified
-   have `elogind` started in the boot runlevel so that `pam_elogind` can communicate with it
-   reboot

### libvirt

Install `virt-manager`.

USE flags needed:

-   `gtk` for `app-emulation/virt-manager`
-   `spice` for `app-emulation/qemu`

```
emerge -a app-emulation/virt-manager
```

This will install a dozens of infrastructual dependencies. Once the dust settles, setup `libvirt` for non-root usage:

```sh
sudo groupadd --system libvirt
sudo usermod -a -G libvirt $(whoami)
newgrp libvirt
sudo vim /etc/libvirt/libvirtd.conf
```

Uncomment the following lines:

```
unix_sock_group = "libvirt" # line 85
unix_sock_rw_perms = "0770" # line 102
```

Finally restart `libvirtd`:

```
sudo rc-service libvirtd restart
```

# Useful

## Portage

[RTFM](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Working/Portage)

-   `emerge --sync` updates the gentoo ebuilds repo in `/var/db/repos/gentoo`
-   `emerge --update --deep --with-bdeps=y --newuse @world` update the system, including dependencies, build dependencies and detect new `USE` flags (if changed)
-   `emerge --search mupdf` search through titles
-   `emerge --searchdesc mupdf` search through descriptions
-   `emerge --ask net-print/cups-pdf` install a named package
-   `qlist -IRv` list installed
-   `emerge -ND @world` to update packages with latest USE flags

### Overlays

An overlay is simply the place where people put third party ebuilds. These ebuilds undergo extensive testing before they can be put into the Portage tree.

`layman` has been superseded by built-in portage tools such as `emaint` and `eselect`.

Packages will be masked by an `~arch` keyword. Before you can `emerge` them, you will need to add them to your `/etc/portage/package.accept_keywords` like so:

```
echo "media-tv/vdrseriestimer" >> /etc/portage/package.accept_keywords
echo "media-plugins/vdr-burn" >> /etc/portage/package.accept_keywords
```

[https://overlays.gentoo.org/](https://overlays.gentoo.org/)

-   `emerge -a app-eselect/eselect-repository` install the repository module for `eselect`
-   `eselect repository list` list official overlay repos
-   `eselect repository enable <overlay>` enable an oevrlay repo
-   `emaint sync -a` sync all ebuild repos
-   `emaint sync -r <repo>` sync a specific remote overlay repo
-   `eix-sync` synchronise everything
-   `eix-remote update` fetch caches for remote overlays
-   `eix -R <name>` search remote overlay repos for package name

Example:

1. Search for overlay [https://gpo.zugaina.org/app-editors/visual-studio-code]()
2. Add the overlay `layman -a dotnet`
3. Sync the overlay repo `layman -s dotnet`
4. Install ebuild `emerge app-editors/visual-studio-code`


## OpenRC cheatsheet

Gentoo's default init system.

-   `rc-update` output services/runlevel matrix
-   `rc-service cronie status` get service status
-   `rc-update add net.wlp40s0 default` register a service in the default runlevel

## Bare git repo

Things to include:

-   /etc/sudoers
-   /etc/conf.d/net
-   /etc/wpa_supplicant/wpa_supplicant.conf
-   /usr/src/linux/.config

## USE flags

### CPU_FLAGS_X86

For instruction set specific optimisations [CPU_FLAGS_X86](Chttps://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/CPU_FLAGS_X86)

```
emerge -a app-portage/cpuid2cpuflags
nvim /etc/portage/make.conf
```

In vim dump the flags output by `cpuid2cpuflags` into the buffer with `:read`, and into the variable `CPU_FLAGS_X86`:

```
:r !cpuid2cpuflags
```

## Troubleshooting

### Firefox and libaom.so build woes

`emerge www-client/firefox` fails with:

```
ERROR: media-libs/libaom-2.0.1::gentoo failed (compile phase):
    ninja -v -j8 -l10 failed
```

Scanning the ebuild environment with `grep -i " error" /var/tmp/portage/media-libs/libaom-2.0.1/temp/environment` and build logs revealed the root cause:

`libaom.so.0: undefined reference to 'aom_sad4xh_sse2'`

Luckily this was documented as a bug [671340](https://bugs.gentoo.org/671340) back in 2018.

In short you need to setup the [CPU_FLAGS_X86](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/CPU_FLAGS_X86) USE flag in `/etc/portage/make.conf`

## libvirtd: Unable to create bridge virbr0: Package not installed

Kernel is missing various networking options, needed to support a network bridge.

See kernel options as documented at [QEMU](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/QEMU).
