---
layout: post
draft: false
title: "A tour of FreeBSD in 2022"
slug: "bsd"
date: "2022-04-17 16:18:25+11:00"
lastmod: "2022-04-28 19:40:15+11:00"
comments: false
categories:
  - bsd
tags:
  - bsd
  - berkeley
  - freebsd
  - netbsd
  - openbsd
  - unix
  - linux
  - multics
---

- [Why](#why)
- [Handy resources](#handy-resources)
- [Talks](#talks)
- [Factoids](#factoids)
- [Things that feel different](#things-that-feel-different)
  - [Software management and ports](#software-management-and-ports)
    - [Ports patching](#ports-patching)
  - [init system](#init-system)
  - [coreutils](#coreutils)
  - [Scheduling](#scheduling)
  - [Block devices](#block-devices)
- [My setup](#my-setup)
  - [NFS](#nfs)
  - [xorg](#xorg)
  - [dwm](#dwm)
  - [st](#st)
  - [powerd++](#powerd)
  - [ntp](#ntp)
  - [fonts](#fonts)

## Why

Mostly curiosity. I've been a GNU/Linux and free software enthuiatist since the late 90's and that's not about to change. More concrete reasons:

- GNU/Linux won the war. However...
- The Berkeley Software Distributions are family of open UNIX-like operating systems with lineage back to AT&T UNIX
- They come as complete and cohesive systems, not a distribution of disparate pieces
- The BSD license is wonderfully permissive
- Bill Joy (the father of Sun, BSD, `vi`, RISC)
- [Marshall Kirk McKusick](https://www.mckusick.com/courses/)
- ZFS, DTrace and Clang
- It feels so damn neat, tidy and robust
- It wont be my daily driver, however it's nice to be aware of what _{Free,Open,Net}BSD_ each bring to the table

## Handy resources

- [FreeBSD Handbook](https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/handbook/basics/)
- [FreeBSD Porters Handbook](https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/porters-handbook)
- [FreeBSD Wiki](https://wiki.freebsd.org)
- [Freshports](https://www.freshports.org/) the place for ports and most recent commits
- [bsd-hardware.info](https://bsd-hardware.info/?view=computers&type=Notebook&vendor=Lenovo&model=ThinkPad+X260+%28All%29)
- [papers.freebsd.org](https://papers.freebsd.org/) the collected works of the FreeBSD community as presented at various conferences and summits

## Talks

- [Using boot environments at scale - by Allan Jude](https://papers.freebsd.org/2018/eurobsdcon/allanjude-bootenv_at_scale/)
- [The ZFS Filesystem workshop - by Philip Paeps](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hjpqa_kjCOI)

## Factoids

- The term daemon comes from Greek mythology and represents an entity that is neither good nor evil, and which invisibly performs useful tasks. This is why the BSD mascot is the cheerful-looking daemon with sneakers and a pitchfork.

## Things that feel different

My Linux biases are deep rooted. It's so fascinating to learn how the BSD's have gone about things differently.

- No GNU core utils, break the addiction today and get comfortable with the BSD variants
- No systemd instead use `sysrc` and `service foo <start,stop,status>`
- `pkg` for packages (not `apt`, `pacman`, `yum`, `pkgtool`, `dnf`, `rpm`, `dpkg`, `emerge`, ...)
- `cd /usr/ports && make search name=lsof` to search ports
- `sysctl` not `/proc`
- `kldload` not `modprobe`
- `kldstat` not `lsmod`
- `pciconf` not `lspci`
- `/var/run/dmesg.boot` for boot logs
- `geom disk list` not `lsblk`
- `camcontrol devlist` and `geom disk list` not `lsblk`

### Software management and ports

`pkg` is the way to manage binaries. Easy.

The [Ports Collection](https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/handbook/ports/#ports-using) is the way to manage source based builds. Its slick.

1. Setup ports tree `git clone https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd-ports.git /usr/ports`
2. Depending on what version of FreeBSD, Use the quarterly branch that matches.
3. Dive into a package (such as `x11-wm/dwm`) and get building `make clean install`

#### Ports patching

[RTFM](https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/porters-handbook/slow-porting/#slow-patch) which I didn't and got frustrated.

The patch tango:

1. Go to the port `/usr/ports/x11-wm/dwm` and `make extract`
2. Head into the unpacked `work` scratch dir `cd work/dwm-6.3`
3. Create copies of all the files you want to patch giving them `orig` extensions: `cp dwm.c dwm.c.orig`
4. Start patching `dwm.c` such as `patch -p1 -i dwm-warp-6.2.diff` and so on.
5. `cd` to root of the port `cd ../..`
6. `make makepatch` will make a single patch based on differences between `*.orig` and the patched versions. As I only patched `dwm.c` it make a patch called `files/patch-dwm.c`
7. `make clean` generated patches are persistent, don't worry
8. `make DWM_CONF=~/git/suckless/dwm/config.h install clean`

In terms of config.def.h you run make extract to extract the port. Then you copy the unmodified config file to config.def.h.orig. Now you apply the changes to config.def.h. Then go to the root of the port which should be /usr/port/x11/sterm and run make makepatch which generates a patch file in files/. The next time make patch is involved it will apply the patch for you.

Custom patches can be placed into the `files` dir within the port. Test the patches with `make patch`

### init system

Poor systemd gets ragged on too much. As a Linux user that enjoys using lots of different distros (Arch, Debian, Slackware, Gentoo, Redhat, Fedora, Alpine, etc) systemd has ultimately saved me time, allowing me to focus on more interesting things like writing code.

TODO

### coreutils

TODO

### Scheduling

Of course there's a `crond` but what's `periodic` all about?

TODO

### Block devices

TODO

## My setup

Mostly on old T-series ThinkPads.

### NFS

While FreeBSD can support `ext2,3,4` family of file systems, it just felt like an anti-pattern. For example the `ext2` kernel module port had GNU core utils as a dependency, which I want avoid for now. Instead use NFS today.

- I have a rock solid Debian Buster server on my network for this kind of thing. Install `nfs-kernel-server` and follow the [handbook](https://debian-handbook.info/browse/stable/sect.nfs-file-server.html) for `/etc/exports`
- Back on FreeBSD use the [handbook](https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/handbook/network-servers/#network-nfs)

```
service enable nfsclient
service start nfsclient
mount busterbox:/nfs /nfs
```

### xorg

```
pkg install drm-kmod
pkg install xorg xf86-input-evdev xf86-video-intel
pw groupmod video -m ben || pw groupmod wheel -m ben
echo 'kern.vty=vt' >> /boot/loader.conf
pkg intall urwfonts
```

Stop of quickly at the `x11-font/nerd-fonts` port and build it.

### dwm

[twm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twm) comes default with the `xorg` infrastructure, as it has since 1987. Respect.

> Started in 1987 by Tom LaStrange, it has been the standard window manager for the X Window System since version X11R4. The name originally stood for Tom's Window Manager

I use `dwm` with some patches. Unlike on a GNU/Linux distro don't try to build from the suckless source.

The "BSD way" is to use the port `x11-wm/dwm`:

1. Run `make` in the `x11-wm/dwm` base, this will unpack a `./work/dwm-6.3` work dir.
2. Get all patches together. I bundle all my `config.h` and the raw patches from suckless.org into its own [repo](https://github.com/bm4cs/suckless)
3. Go to the port `/usr/ports/x11-wm/dwm` and `make extract`
4. Head into the unpacked `work` scratch dir `cd work/dwm-6.3`
5. Create copies of all the files you want to patch giving them `orig` extensions: `cp dwm.c dwm.c.orig`
6. Start patching `dwm.c` such as `patch -p1 -i dwm-warp-6.2.diff` and so on. For convenience I bundle my `config.h` and the raw patches from suckless.org into a [standalone repo](https://github.com/bm4cs/suckless)
7. `cd` to root of the port `cd ../..`
8. `make makepatch` will make a single patch based on differences between `*.orig` and the patched versions. As I only patched `dwm.c` it make a patch called `files/patch-dwm.c`
9. `make clean` generated patches are persistent, don't worry
10. `make DWM_CONF=~/git/suckless/dwm/config.h install clean`

### st

Same deal as `dwm` embrace the Ports Collection.

1. `x11/sterm`
1. `make ST_CONF=/home/ben/git/suckless/st/config.h reinstall`

### powerd++

Reduced power management, when on a thinkpad.

```sh
pkg install powerdxx
sysrc powerdxx_enable=YES
```

### ntp

```
ntpdate -v -b in.pool.ntp.org
```

### fonts

```sh
pkg install mkfontscale
curl -L https://github.com/ryanoasis/nerd-fonts/releases/download/v2.1.0/CascadiaCode.zip -o cc.zip
unzip -d cc cc.zip
rm -f ./cc/*Windows*
cp ./cc/*.ttf /usr/local/share/fonts/TTF/
cd /usr/local/share/fonts/TTF
mkfontscale
fc-cache -f
fc-list | cut -f2 -d: | sort -u | less    # list of X11 usable font names
```
