---
layout: post
draft: true
title: "Deep work"
slug: "deepwork"
date: "2022-05-30 13:41:41+11:00"
lastmod: "2022-05-30 13:41:42+11:00"
comments: false
categories:
  - lifehacks
tags:
  - depth
  - attention
  - focus
  - productivity
---

Ideas from Cal Newport's book.


- Attention must be protected at all costs.
- Human beings are at their best when immersed deeply in something challenging.
- To build your working life around the experience of flow produced by deep work is a proven path to deep satisfaction.
- The ability to master hard things
- The ability to produce (quality and speed) at an elite level
- To learn hard things quickly, you must focus intensely without distraction.
- If you're comfortable going deep, you'll be comfortable mastering the increasingly complex system and skills needed to thrive in the new economy
- High quality work = (time spent) x (intensity of focus)
- Due to the lack of metrics on the damaging affects of distraction, a culture around shallow *busy work* has arisen - its better to look busy typing lots of emails, going to meetings and staying back late
- Put another way, a wooden wheel is not noble, but its shaping can be. The same applies to knowledge work. You don’t need a rarified job; you need instead a rarified approach to your work.

## Approaches and tactics

- The more you try to do, the less you actually accomplish.” They elaborate that execution should be aimed at a small number of “wildly important goals.” This simplicity will help focus an organization’s energy to a sufficient intensity to ignite real results.
- 4DX framework is based on the fundamental premise that execution is more difficult than strategizing.
- This is why the minimum unit of time for deep work in this philosophy tends to be at least one full day. To put aside a few hours in the morning, for example, is too short to count as a deep work stretch for an adherent of this approach.
- Chappell made a rule that deep work needed to happen in ninety-minute chunks (recognizing correctly that it takes time to ease into a state of concentration) and he decided he would try to schedule these chunks in an ad hoc manner whenever appropriate openings in his schedule arose.
- Nietzsche said: “It is only ideas gained from walking that have any worth
- Idleness is not just a vacation, an indulgence or a vice; it is as indispensable to the brain as vitamin D is to the body, and deprived of it we suffer a mental affliction as disfiguring as rickets...its, paradoxically, necessary to getting any work done.



## Studies

- Prof Gloria Mark at University of California on attention fragmentation
- Csikszentmihalyi on flow state
- The eudaimonia machine (greek concept of a state in which you’re achieving your full human potential) is a building design that promotes an optimal human working environment
